Metaproteomics of fecal samples of Crohn's disease and Ulcerative Colitis. 
Crohn's Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC) are chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) of the gastrointestinal tract. This study used non-invasive LC-MS/MS to find disease specific microbial and human proteins which might be used later for an easier diagnosis. Therefore, 17 healthy controls, 11 CD patients and 14 UC patients but also 13 Irritable Bowel Disease (IBS) patients, 8 Colon Adenoma (CA) patients, and 8 Gastric Carcinoma (GCA) patients were investigated. The proteins were extracted from the fecal samples with liquid phenol in a ball mill. Subsequently, the proteins were digested tryptically to peptides and analyzed by an Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. For protein identification and interpretation of taxonomic and functional results, the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software was used. Cluster analysis and non-parametric test (analysis of similarities) separated healthy controls from patients with CD and UC as well as from patients with GCA. Among others, CD and UC correlated with an increase of neutrophil extracellular traps and immune globulins G (IgG). In addition, a decrease of human IgA and the transcriptional regulatory protein RprY from Bacillus fragilis was found for CD and UC. A specific marker in feces for CD was an increased amount of the human enzyme sucrose-isomaltase. SIGNIFICANCE: Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis are chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, whose diagnosis required comprehensive medical examinations including colonoscopy. The impact of the microbial communities in the gut on the pathogenesis of these diseases is poorly understood. Therefore, this study investigated the impact of gut microbiome on these diseases by a metaproteome approach, revealing several disease specific marker proteins. Overall, this indicated that fecal metaproteomics has the potential to be useful as non-invasive tool for a better and easier diagnosis of both diseases. 
