Dataset for proteomic analysis of arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 knockout MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. 
Arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) is frequently upregulated in breast cancer. An unbiased analysis of proteomes of parental MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and two separate NAT1 knockout (KO) cell lines were performed. Among 4,890 proteins identified, 737 and 651 proteins were found significantly (p < 0.01) upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in NAT1 KO cells, compared to the parental cells. Each set of proteins was analyzed to identify Gene Ontology biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components that were enriched in the set. Among the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO cells, processes associated with MHC major histocompatibility complex I-mediated antigen presentation were significantly enriched. Multiple processes involved in mitochondrial functions were collectively downregulated in NAT1 KO cells, including multiple subunits of mitochondrial ATP synthase (Complex V of the electron transport chain). This was accompanied by a reduction in cell cycle-associated proteins and an increase in pro-apoptotic pathways in NAT1 KO cells. The current dataset contains additional representations of the biological processes and components that are differentially enriched in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells and will serve as a basis for generating novel hypotheses regarding the role of NAT1 in breast cancer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035953.
Specifications Table
Value of the Data
NAT1 is frequently upregulated in breast cancer and has been shown to contribute to cancer growth in both in vitro and in vivo. However, the mechanism by which NAT1 contributes to breast cancer growth remains unknown. In attempt to generate novel hypotheses, the global proteomes of a breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative) and its NAT1 knockout (KO) counterparts were analyzed and compared.
The resulting lists of proteins that are differentially abundant in NAT1 KO cells (compared to the parental cells) are useful in understanding the molecular and cellular processes that NAT1 plays in breast cancer cells.
These data can 1) directly benefit researchers studying the novel link between NAT1 and breast cancer, and 2) others in the breast cancer field, for they suggest biological pathways that may be targeted for cancer therapeutics.
The current dataset describes the biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components that are differentially regulated in NAT1 KO cells (e.g., antigen presentation and mitochondrial complex V). These data can be used to generate new hypotheses regarding the novel roles of NAT1 in breast cancer or to support and complement future experimental findings in this field.
Data Description
Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components significantly enriched among proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. Panel A shows false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p values (i.e., q values) for selected GO biological processes (GO terms and their IDs) that are significantly enriched among the upregulated proteins. The GO biological process terms were grouped (and separated using dotted lines and colors) according to a common or larger biological process/category they belong to (e.g., 'Antigen Presentation' or "Proteolysis"). Panels B and C show fold enrichments of selected, top GO molecular function and GO cellular component terms enriched among the upregulated proteins, respectively.
Fig 1
Relationships and connections between the GO biological processes enriched among the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 2
Relationships and connections between the GO molecular functions enriched among the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 3
Relationships and connections between the GO cellular components enriched among the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 4
Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components significantly enriched among proteins downregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. Panel A shows false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p values (i.e., q values) for selected GO biological processes (GO terms and their IDs) that are significantly enriched among the downregulated proteins. The GO biological process terms were grouped (and separated using dotted lines and colors) according to a common or larger biological process/category they belong to (e.g., 'Mitochondria' or 'Cell Cycle'). Panels B and C show fold enrichments of selected, top GO molecular function and GO cellular component terms enriched among the downregulated proteins, respectively.
Fig 5
Relationships and connections between the GO biological processes enriched among the proteins downregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 6
The current dataset including 18 raw data files has been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD035953 and 10.6019/PXD035953. It represents analyses of the data generated from proteomic analysis of parental MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and two NAT1 KO cell lines. It is separated into two groups of figures: (1) analyses of proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO cells (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4) and (2) analyses of proteins downregulated in NAT1 KO cells (Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8).
Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components that are significantly enriched (q [FDR] < 0.01) among proteins upregulated or downregulated in NAT1 KO cells were identified using GOnet and PANTHER Overrepresentation Test. Fig. 1A shows false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p values (i.e., q values) for selected GO biological processes (GO terms and their IDs) that are significantly enriched among the upregulated proteins. The GO biological process terms were grouped (and separated using dotted lines and colors) according to a common or larger biological process/category they belong to (e.g., 'Antigen Presentation' or 'Proteolysis'). Fig. 1B and 1C show fold enrichments of selected, top GO molecular function and GO cellular component terms enriched among the upregulated proteins, respectively. Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4 show flow charts that allow visualization of the inter-relationships between the GO terms enriched among the upregulated proteins. The flow charts were generated using GOrilla. Figs. 2, 3, and 4 represent GO biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components, enriched among the upregulated proteins, respectively. White, yellow and orange colors in Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4 represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Relationships and connections between the GO molecular functions enriched among the proteins downregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 7
Relationships and connections between the GO cellular components enriched among the proteins downregulated in NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells. The chart was generated using GOrilla [5]. White, yellow and orange colors in represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Fig 8
Fig. 5A shows FDR-adjusted p values for selected GO biological processes, significantly enriched among the downregulated proteins. The GO biological process terms were grouped according to a common or larger biological process/category they belong to (e.g., 'Mitochondria' or 'Cell Cycle'). Fig. 5B and 5C show fold enrichments of selected, top GO molecular function and GO cellular component terms enriched among the downregulated proteins, respectively. Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8 show flow charts that that allow visualization of the inter-relationships between the GO terms enriched among the downregulated proteins, based on analyses by GOrilla. Figs. 6, 7, and 8 represent the GO biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components enriched among the downregulated proteins, respectively. White, yellow and orange colors in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8 represent p values of <10-3, 10-3 to 10-5, and 10-5 to 10-7, respectively.
Experimental Design, Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
Two different NAT1 knockout (KO) MDA-MB-231 cell lines were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology and two unique guide RNAs. Generation and characterization of NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cell lines have been previously described. Parental and NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured in DMEM media (Cytiva) containing glucose (4.5 g/L), fetal bovine serum (10%), L-glutamine (4 mM), pyruvate (1 mM) and pen/strep (1%). Cells were cultured at 37 degreesC with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator.
Proteomic Analysis
Proteomic studies were conducted using a TMT-labeling approach as previously described to compare the effects of CRISPR/Cas9 KO of NAT1 activity on wild-type and two NAT1 KO MDA-MB-231 cell lines (n = 3 technical replicates per condition). Cells were lysed in 2% SDS dissolved in 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5 and supplemented with 10 mM sodium butyrate and 1X HALTTM (Thermo Fisher) protease inhibitors. Protein concentrations estimated using a detergent compatible assay (BioRad, Cat. No. 500-0116) against a bovine serum albumin standard curve. Protein lysates (200 mug) were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Thermo Fisher), denatured with 8 M urea and alkylated with iodoacetamide followed by centrifugation through a high molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filter (MilliporeSigma; 10k MWCO). After digestion with recombinant LysC and then sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), the digested proteins were collected and quantified by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher) A205 nm prior to concentration adjustment to 0.5 mug/muL using 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Protein digested samples (50 mug) were labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) using TMT10plex(TM) Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher); samples were then concentrated and desalted with Oasis HLB Extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation) using a modified protocol for extraction of the digested peptides. Samples were then subjected to high pH reversed phase separation with fraction concatenation on a Beckman System Gold LC system supplemented with 126 solvent module and 166 detector in tandem with a BioRad Model 2110 Fraction Collector. A total of 18 concatenated fractions were collected and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to detect and quantify TMT-labeled peptides. Briefly, every high pH reversed phase fraction was dissolved in 50 microL solution of 2% v/v acetonitrile/0.1% v/v formic acid and 2 microL of each fraction was analyzed on EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and an Orbitrap Elite - ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 75 microm x 2 cm, nanoViper (C18, 3 microm, 100 Aa) trap prior to separation at 250 nl/min on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50 microm x 15 cm, nanoViper (C18, 2 microm, 100 Aa) separating column (Thermo Fisher) with a 2 to 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient using an EASY n-LC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher). Eluted peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher) with an ion transfer capillary temperature of 225 degreesC and 1.6 kV spray voltage. An Nth Order Double Play was created in Xcalibur v2.2. Scan event one of the method obtained an FTMS MS1 scan (normal mass range; 60,000 resolution, full scan type, positive polarity, centroid data type) for the range 300-2000 m/z. Scan event two obtained FTMS MS2 scans (HCD activation, 1.0 m/z isolation width, normalized collision energy of 40.0, default charge state of 2, 0.1 msec activation time, normal mass range, 60,000 resolution, centroid data type) on up to 10 peaks that had a minimum signal threshold of 5,000 counts from scan event one. The lock mass option was enabled (0% lock mass abundance) using the 371.101236 m/z polysiloxane peak as an internal calibrant. Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 was used to direct the Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and SequestHT (Thermo Fisher) searches of the raw data using the 5/12/2017 version of the UniprotKB Homo sapiens reference proteome reviewed canonical and isoform sequences. The search criteria included: enzyme specified was trypsin (maximum two missed cleavages; inhibition by P) with Carbamidomethyl(C) and TMT10plex (K, N-term) set as a static modifications and Oxidation(M) as dynamic. Fragment tolerance was 0.05 Da (monoisotopic) and parent tolerance was 50 ppm (monoisotopic). A Target Decoy PSM Validator node was included in the Proteome Discoverer workflow. The result files from Proteome Discoverer were loaded into Scaffold Q+S v4.4.5. Scaffold was used to calculate the false discovery rate using the Scaffold Local FDR and Protein Prophet algorithms. Peptides were accepted if the identification had probability greater than 99.9% and parent mass error within 2 ppm. Proteins were accepted if they had a probability greater than 99.9% and at least one peptide. Proteins were grouped into clusters to satisfy the parsimony principle. TMT purity correction factors were obtained from Thermo. Intensity based normalization of reporter ions was done using the median calculation type, unique peptides blocking level, individual spectrum references, and normalization between samples. The reference value was required for use in the Scaffold Q module, and the minimum dynamic range of reporter ions was set to 1%. The results were annotated with human gene ontology information from the Gene Ontology Annotations Database (ftp.ebi.ac.uk). This yielded 4890 proteins with a false discovery rate of 0.389%.
Data Analysis
Levels of protein species in NAT1 KOs were transformed to log2 fold change relative to those in parental cells. MetaCoreTM (https://clarivate.com/products/metacore/) software were used to analyze protein fold changes between cell lines and predict probable cellular pathways affected by NAT1 deletion. In addition to MetaCoreTM, we analyzed our data through PANTHER Classification System, GOnet, and Reactome (ver 65). These online algorithms provide gene function, ontology, pathways and statistical analysis tools.
For analyses of data by GOnet, the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO cells and those downregulated were analyzed separately via online algorithm available at https://tools.dice-database.org/GOnet/. Each list containing gene symbols of differentially regulated proteins was uploaded as a CSV file. Under 'GO namespace', 'biological_process,' 'molecular_function,' or 'cellular_component' was selected, and for analysis type, 'GO term enrichment' was selected. For 'q-value threshold' and 'Background,' default options were chosen, which were '* (<= 0.05)' and 'all annotated genes', respectively. The data was in a CSV format which was exported into a MS Excel file.
For analyses of data by the PANTHER Classification System, the proteins upregulated in NAT1 KO cells and those downregulated were analyzed separately via online algorithm available at http://www.pantherdb.org/ (version released on 10/24/2021). Each list containing gene symbols ('ID list') of differentially regulated proteins was uploaded as a CSV file. Homo sapiens was selected under 'Select organism.' For type of analysis, 'Statistical enrichment test' was chosen, and subsequently 'PANTHER Protein Class' . The tabulated data output was then exported into a MS Excel file.
Data Presentation
Bar graphs showing q values or fold enrichments were created using GraphPad Prism (ver 9). Flow charts showing relationships between the significantly enriched GO terms were generated using GOrilla.
