Cold-adapted amphipod species upon heat stress: Proteomic responses and their correlation with transcriptomic responses. 
The cellular heat shock response (HSR) comprises transcriptomic and proteomic reactions to thermal stress. It was here addressed, how the proteomic, together with the transcriptomic HSR, relate to the thermal sensitivities of three cold-adapted but differently thermo-sensitive freshwater amphipod species. The proteomes of thermosensitive Eulimnogammarus verrucosus and thermotolerant Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, both endemic to Lake Baikal, and of thermotolerant Holarctic Gammarus lacustris were investigated upon 24 h exposure to the species-specific 10 % lethal temperatures (LT10). Furthermore, correlations of heat stress induced changes in proteomes (this study) and transcriptomes (previous study with identical experimental design) were examined. Proteomes indicated that the HSR activated processes encompassed (i) proteostasis maintenance, (ii) maintenance of cell adhesion, (iii) oxygen transport, (iv) antioxidant response, and (v) regulation of protein synthesis. Thermo-sensitive E. verrucosus showed the most pronounced proteomic HSR and the lowest correlation of transcriptomic and proteomic HSRs. For proteins related to translation (ribosomal proteins, elongation factors), transcriptomic and proteomic changes were inconsistent: transcripts were downregulated in many cases, with levels of corresponding proteins remaining unchanged. In the Eulimnogammarus species, levels of hemocyanin protein but not transcript were increased upon heat stress, suggesting a HSR also directed to enhance oxygen transport. Thermosensitive E. verrucosus showed the most pronounced relocation of transcription/translation activity to proteostasis maintenance, which may indicate that the general species-specific stability of protein structure could be a fundamental determinant of thermotolerance. By combining transcriptomic and proteomic response data, this study provides a comprehensive picture of the cellular HSR components in the studied amphipods. 
