Spectrin-beta 2 facilitates the selective accumulation of GABAA receptors at somatodendritic synapses. 
Fast synaptic inhibition is dependent on targeting specific GABAAR subtypes to dendritic and axon initial segment (AIS) synapses. Synaptic GABAARs are typically assembled from alpha1-3, beta and gamma subunits. Here, we isolate distinct GABAARs from the brain and interrogate their composition using quantitative proteomics. We show that alpha2-containing receptors co-assemble with alpha1 subunits, whereas alpha1 receptors can form GABAARs with alpha1 as the sole alpha subunit. We demonstrate that alpha1 and alpha2 subunit-containing receptors co-purify with distinct spectrin isoforms; cytoskeletal proteins that link transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeleton. beta2-spectrin was preferentially associated with alpha1-containing GABAARs at dendritic synapses, while beta4-spectrin was associated with alpha2-containing GABAARs at AIS synapses. Ablating beta2-spectrin expression reduced dendritic and AIS synapses containing alpha1 but increased the number of synapses containing alpha2, which altered phasic inhibition. Thus, we demonstrate a role for spectrins in the synapse-specific targeting of GABAARs, determining the efficacy of fast neuronal inhibition.
Introduction
Type A gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors (GABAAR) are Cl- preferring ligand-gated ion channels that mediate fast synaptic inhibition, a process that is critical in determining neuronal output, and limiting hyperexcitability. They are also the sites of action for barbiturates, benzodiazepines and neurosteroids, all of which act as GABAAR-positive allosteric modulators (PAMs).
GABAARs are hetero-pentamers that can be constructed from alpha(1-6), beta(1-3), gamma(1-3), delta, epsilon, theta and pi subunits. Studies based on knock-out mice and recombinant expression suggest that the majority of synaptic GABAARs are composed of alpha1-3, beta1-3 and gamma2 subunits. Immunological- and benzodiazepine-affinity purification coupled with mass spectroscopy has been used to compare the expression levels of GABAAR alpha subunit variants in the forebrain. These approaches have demonstrated that alpha1 is expressed at 5-10-fold higher levels than either the alpha2 or alpha3 subunits. Thus, the alpha1 subunit is likely to be a component of the majority of GABAARs that mediate synaptic inhibition in the brain.
Immunolocalization studies have revealed that principal neurons within the hippocampus express alpha1-3, beta1-3 and gamma2 subunits, suggesting extensive heterogeneity of GABAAR structure within individual neurons. Consistent with this, receptors containing the alpha1 subunit are predominantly found at dendritic synapses, while the alpha2 subunit is highly enriched at their equivalents on the axon initial segment (AIS). Such differential receptor distribution is likely to have profound local effects on excitability and pharmacology as alpha-subunit isoforms determine the decay of inhibitory postsynaptic currents and ligand sensitivity.
The accumulation of GABAARs at synaptic sites is dependent upon their selective confinement at these structures, processes that are dependent upon their direct binding to components of the inhibitory postsynaptic scaffold such as gephyrin (Gphn) and collybistin (CB). Ablating the expression of either protein or modifying their affinity for individual GABAAR subunits compromises global inhibitory synapse formation and the magnitude of inhibitory synaptic currents. But little is known about how the targeting of specific GABAAR subtypes to different neuronal locations is achieved.
To gain insights into the mechanisms that may contribute to the selective accumulation of GABAARs at synapses in different neuronal compartments, we isolated biochemically distinct populations of receptors enriched in the alpha1 and alpha2 subunits which were then subject to native gel electrophoresis. Their subunit composition and associated proteins were identified and quantified using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) and their composition was subsequently compared.
Here, using this approach, we demonstrate that GABAARs assembled from alpha1 and alpha2 subunits are likely to comprise of alpha1alpha1beta3gamma2 or alpha2alpha1beta3gamma2, respectively. These receptors are associated with and bind to distinct spectrins; neuronal cytoskeletal proteins, that determine the plasma membrane distribution of integral membrane proteins. Spectrin heterodimers incorporating beta2 spectrin (encoded by the SPTBN1 gene) favored alpha1 subunit association, whereas beta4 spectrin (encoded by the SPTBN4 gene) specifically associated with the alpha2 subunit. Ablating beta2 spectrin expression altered the beta2 spectrin/beta4 spectrin balance and compromised the formation of dendritic synapses, but not their counterparts on the AIS, leading to modifications in the magnitude of phasic inhibition.
Results
Analyzing the composition of GABAAR subtypes assembled from the alpha1 and alpha2 subunits
Analyzing the subunit composition of native GABAAR subtypes using affinity purification and quantitative mass spectroscopy.
a alpha2 GABAAR-containing protein complexes were immunopurified using pre-optimized conditions (Supplementary Figure 1) using anti-9E10 (myc) antibodies, from plasma membrane fractions of pHalpha2 mice and resolved by BN-PAGE. Stable protein complexes were observed at ~720 kDa and ~250 kDa (red arrows). The complexes were consistently present in the lysate prior to immunopurification. Immunopurified complexes were visualized by both immunoblot and colloidal Coomassie staining. Representative images from an n = 9 experiment. b The resolved alpha2 complexes at approximately 250 kDa, the mass of an intact pentameric GABAAR, were characterized by quantitative proteomics compared to anti-9E10 immunopurified material from wild type mice (n = 9, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). Detected peptides were mapped to the mouse proteome and the GABAAR subunit expression quantified by measuring the spectral index normalized to the global index (SIGI) (n = 4). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 1. c Double immunopurifications for alpha2-containing GABAARs were carried out to achieve more highly purified alpha2-containing GABAARs. These were visualized by immunoblot where a persistent protein band was observed at 250 kDa (red arrow). Representative image from an n = 3 experiment. d The 250 kDa band was analyzed for GABAAR subunit expression measured by quantitative LC-MS/MS (n = 3, *p < 0.05). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 2. e The immunopurification experiments were repeated for alpha1 GABAAR-containing protein complexes in wild type mice. Complexes were resolved and visualized by immunoblot and Coomassie staining. Stable protein complexes were observed at ~720 kDa and ~250 kDa (red arrows). Representative images from an n = 5 experiment. f The 250 kDa band was analyzed for GABAAR subunit composition measured by quantitative LC-MS/MS (n = 5). Error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 3. The raw gel/membrane scans are shown in Supplementary Figure 2.
To gain insights into the composition of endogenous GABAARs containing the alpha1 and alpha2 subunits, we purified forebrain plasma membranes and solubilized them in 0.5% Triton 100. We used these extracts to immunoprecipitate alpha1 and alpha2 subunit-containing receptors using immobilized alpha1 monoclonal antibodies and wild-type tissue, or immobilized 9E10 (myc) antibodies and tissue from knock-in mice where the alpha2 subunit had been modified to contain a pHluorin and 9E10 (myc) epitope on its n-terminus (pHalpha2) respectively. This modification is functionally silent and required due to the low abundance of the alpha2 subunit and the paucity of suitable antibodies. The immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted in 2% TWEEN and 0.01% SDS, a combination sufficient to elute the material from the beads without disturbing stable protein complexes (Supplementary Figure 1), resolved by blue native-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) followed by either colloidal Coomassie staining or immunoblotting with a monoclonal antibody against the alpha1 subunit (for alpha1 receptors) or GFP (for alpha2 receptors). Under these conditions a band of approximately 250 kDa, the predicted molecular mass of pentameric GABAARs, was evident together with a larger species of 720 kDa for alpha2-containing receptors. These species were present in plasma membrane lysates, and following immunopurification, where they were visible by both immunoblot and Coomassie staining (Fig. 1a).
Given that 250 kDa is the predicted molecular mass of a pentametric GABAAR, the composition of this species was analyzed using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS). Following subtraction of proteins that bound to anti-9E10 beads in wild type tissue, proteins were quantified via their globally normalized spectral index (SIGI), an accepted means of label-free quantification. The 250 kDa band was highly enriched in GABAAR subunits. With purified alpha2-containing receptors we detected the alpha2 subunit (p = 0.009966789), the alpha1 subunit was also significantly (p = 0.017830406) detected at a 1:1 ratio, along beta2 (p = 0.040276721), beta3 (p = 0.004662486), and gamma2 (p = 0.016340521) (Fig. 1b). To confirm these data were not contamination from closely associated alpha1-containing receptors, we performed a double immunoprecipitation of alpha2-containing receptors. Immunoprecipitation was carried out using anti-9E10 beads and pHalpha2 tissue, followed by elution of the immunoprecipitated proteins, 10-fold dilution with lysis buffer, and a second immunoprecipitation reaction with anti-9E10 beads prior to resolving the complexes by BN-PAGE. The double immunoprecipitated alpha2-containing protein complexes were clearly visible by Coomassie staining (Fig. 1c). The 250 kDa band was excised and the GABAAR subunit composition was assessed by quantitative proteomics. Strikingly, the alpha1 subunit was once again significantly detected (p = 0.000241543) along with alpha2 subunits (p = 0.0007118), as well as beta3 (p = 0.018429937), and gamma2 (p = 0.018648054) subunits (Fig. 1d).
Next, we repeated the experiments described above, but immunoprecipitated alpha1-containing receptors from wild type tissue using immobilized alpha1 monoclonal antibodies. alpha1-containing protein complexes at approximately 250 kDa and 720 kDa and were clearly visible by immunoblot in the total plasma membrane lysates and following immunoprecipitation by both immunoblot and Coomassie staining (Fig. 1e). The 250 kDa species was excised and analyzed by quantitative proteomics. The alpha1 subunit was recovered (p = 0.001688864) at 10-fold higher levels than alpha2 or alpha3 subunits, however they were both significantly detected (p = 0.000595758 and p = 0.0162021 respectively), along with beta1 (p = 0.008332315), beta2 (p = 0.015409547), beta3 (p = 0.01113512), delta (p = 0.012970599). and gamma2 (p = 0.008575418) (Fig. 1f). Components of extrasynaptic GABAARs (alpha4-6) were not detected in either alpha1 or alpha2 purifications. Intriguingly, the delta subunit co-purified with alpha1 (Fig. 1f), which is consistent with published studies suggesting that receptors assembled from alpha1 and delta subunits contribute to tonic current in some neuronal populations.
Collectively, these studies suggest that the majority of synaptic GABAAR subtypes contain the alpha1 subunit. They further suggest that neurons assemble a highly abundant population of GABAARs that contain both alpha1 and alpha2 subunits.
Comparing the subcellular distribution of the GABAAR alpha1 and alpha2 subunits
Determining the subcellular distribution of alpha1 and alpha2 GABAAR subunits in cultured neurons.
a) Mouse neurons from pHalpha2 mice were fixed and permeabilized at Days In Vitro (DIV) 21 and immunostained using antibodies against GFP (alpha2), alpha1, and AnkG. Dendrites and AIS were distinguished by the presence or absence of AnkG immunoreactivity. Scale bar = 10 mum and 2 mum in cropped images. b) The colocalization of alpha1 and alpha2 puncta were quantified in AnkG positive (AIS) and negative (dendritic) compartments. The quantification was expressed as the percentage of alpha1 puncta that contain alpha2 (alpha1/2) and the percentage of alpha2 puncta that contain alpha1 (alpha2/1) (n = 4 individual cultures, ***p < 0.001). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 4. c) DIV21 mouse neurons were immunostained with antibodies against alpha1, alpha2 and VGAT to visualize subunit colocalization at active synapses. Scale bar = 10 mum and 2 mum in cropped images. Error bars represent the SEM.
To interpret our biochemical studies further, we prepared cultured hippocampal neurons from P1 pHalpha2 mice. The cultures were fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained at DIV18-21 with antibodies against GFP (to enhance the alpha2 signal), the alpha1 subunit and Ankyrin G (AnkG); an accepted marker for the AIS (Fig. 2a). We compared the co-localization of alpha1 with alpha2 subunit immunoreactivity (alpha1/alpha2) and vice versa (alpha2/alpha1) on the AIS and on cell bodies/dendrites using confocal microscopy. Co-localization of subunit immunoreactivity was then determined using the synapse plugin for ImageJ as previously described (Nakamura et al., 2016, Nathanson et al., 2019 Kontou et al., 2021). On the AIS approximately 30% of alpha2 puncta on the AIS immunostaining overlapped with alpha1 immunoreactivity. Likewise, a similar proportion of alpha1 puncta containing alpha2 immunostaining were seen (Fig. 2b). Similar analyses were performed on dendrites which revealed that more than 45% of alpha2 puncta contained alpha1 immunoreactivity. In contrast, less than 20% of dendritic alpha1-positive puncta contained alpha2 (p = 0.0000093). To ascertain if the respective alpha subunit isoforms co-localized at synapses, pHalpha2 cultures were stained with antibodies against the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter (VGAT), GFP, and the alpha1 subunit. Puncta containing both alpha1 and alpha2 subunits opposed to VGAT were evident, as were synapses containing alpha1 subunit-only isoforms (Fig. 2c).
Collectively these results demonstrate high co-localization of the alpha2 and alpha1 subunits on both the AIS and dendrites which is consistent with our biochemical studies suggesting their co-assembly into single receptors. The lower levels of co-localization of alpha1 with alpha2 in dendrites suggests the existence of a large population of GABAARs containing just the alpha1 subunit, and a smaller population of mixed alpha1-alpha2 receptors in these structures.
Analyzing the protein composition of high molecular weight alpha1 and alpha2 subunit-containing complexes
Comparing the proteomes associated with GABAAR subtypes.
a) alpha1 and alpha2 containing protein complexes were immunopurified from mouse forebrain plasma membrane fractions. The complexes were resolved by BN-PAGE and the high molecular weight complexes were identified (~700 kDa). These were excised and the proteins identified by label-free quantitative proteomics. The identified proteins in alpha1 and alpha2 complexes were compared to control samples, and those proteins significantly enriched were included for downstream analysis. A Venn diagram showing the number of significant proteins unique to alpha1 or alpha2 and overlapping proteins (n = 7). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 5. b) The lists of significantly enriched unique and overlapping proteins were used to create network diagrams. Known interactions between detected proteins were obtained using stringent, high confidence, direct experimental association parameters from STRINGdb. These were used to construct a network diagram of protein nodes and arrows to indicate known interactions. The node diameter was scaled relative to the SiGi values detected for each protein. An overlay of Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process terms was used to provide protein classification information (n = 7). c) PCA analysis of each biological replicate for alpha1 and alpha2 containing protein complexes. PCA loadings were also included to show the contribution of each protein to the position of samples on the PCA plot (n = 7).
We used LC-MS/MS coupled with label-free quantification to compare proteins that co-purify with alpha1 with alpha2 containing GABAARs. Our studies focused on the 720 kDa species detected using immunoblotting and Coomassie staining following BN-PAGE (Fig. 1a, e). SiGi values for immunoprecipitated proteins were compared to control purifications (non-immune IgG or anti-9E10 in wild type tissue for alpha1 with alpha2 respectively). Only those proteins significantly enriched compared to control were included for downstream analysis. Using these criteria 121 proteins were detected co-purifying with the alpha1 subunit, while 123 were associated with alpha2, 45 of which were common to both purifications (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Data 5).
To interrogate the protein complexes further, we performed network analysis on the significantly enriched proteins associated with alpha1 and alpha2 receptors. Protein association data was obtained from STRINGdb for known experimental interactions as previously described. We overlaid the highest-scoring Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process term for each protein to provide insight into protein function. We also scaled the node size representing each protein to the SiGi values detected for each protein. In this way we were able to visualize quantitative networks and subnetworks along with developing insights into the functional groups of proteins that associate with GABAARs. The network analysis was carried out for the proteins that were exclusively associated with either alpha1 or alpha2 receptors, and those that were associated with both receptor subtypes (Fig. 3b). The alpha1 receptor uniquely co-purified with a significant subnetwork of structural and signaling proteins, including Map6, Actn1, Synpo, Shank3, Ina, Ppp1r9b, Syngap1, and Camk2a. The alpha2 receptor specifically co-purified with structural proteins, including Cnp, Cntn1, Golga2, Cntnap1, and beta4 spectrin. Both alpha1 and alpha2 receptors co-purified with a subnetwork of spectrin isoforms; beta2 spectrin, beta3 spectrin, alpha2 spectrin, along with Myo5a, Myh10, and Gphn.
Finally, we used principal component analysis (PCA) to assess the degree of similarity in binding protein patterns between the alpha1 and alpha2 receptor subtypes. The significantly enriched proteins were assembled into a matrix of all repeats and detected proteins along with the SiGi values for each. The data were normalized by z-transformation and the PCA plot created using the ggfortify package (accessed January 2021) in R. The alpha1 and alpha2 receptors readily divided into two distinct groups based on their associated protein profile. The PCA loadings were also included to illustrate the proteins that were most influential in producing this separation. These included Gphn and beta2 spectrin, which were more highly associated with alpha1 receptors, and beta4 spectrin, which was uniquely associated with alpha2 receptors. Significantly, Ankyrin B and Ankyrin G are known spectrin-binding partners and were also detected in our receptor purifications.
Taken together, these data demonstrate the similarities and the differences in the binding protein profiles of alpha1 and alpha2 receptors. They also highlight those specific interactions with different spectrin isoforms may play an important role in determining differential localization of receptor clustering.
Spectrin isoforms bind differentially to GABAAR alpha subunit isoforms and are enriched at inhibitory synapses
Assessing the association of spectrins with GABAARs.
a) Immunopurified alpha1 and alpha2 containing GABAARs were resolved by BN-PAGE, transferred, and immunoblotted for alpha1 and pHalpha2 subunits to visualize their high molecular weight complexes. These were also probed for the presence of beta2 and beta4 spectrin to demonstrate that they are also present in complexes with alpha1 and alpha2 containing GABAARs. Representative images from an n = 3 experiment. b) GST-fusion proteins for intracellular domains of the alpha1, alpha2, and alpha4 were created along with GST alone. These were used to perform pulldowns from brain plasma membrane lysates and probe for beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin interaction by immunoblot. Equal loading of the fusion proteins was confirmed by colloidal Coomassie staining. Representative images from an n = 3 experiment. The amount of beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin pulled down was quantified by densitometry (n = 3) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 6. c) Immunocytochemistry for alpha1, alpha2, beta2 spectrin, and beta4 spectrin was carried out in fixed and permeabilized DIV 21 primary cultured pHalpha2 mouse neurons. Dendritic and AIS regions were imaged by confocal microscopy. Representative images from n = 16 from 4 individual cultures. Scale bar = 10 mum and 2 mum in cropped images. Error bars represent the SEM. The raw membrane/gel images are shown in Supplementary Figure 3.
To investigate the association of alpha1 and alpha2 subunit-containing GABAARs with spectrin isoforms further, purified alpha1 and alpha2 receptors were resolved by BN-PAGE and immunoblotted (Fig. 4a). Coomassie staining was used to confirm equal protein loading. Immunoprecipitated alpha1 and alpha2 receptors showed immunopositivity for alpha1. Immunopurified alpha1 receptors showed a distinct band of alpha1 immunopositivity at 250 kDa and 720 kDa. Immunopurified alpha2 receptors showed alpha2 immunopositivity at around 270 kDa and 750 kDa - consistent with the 27 kDa pHluorin-myc modification on the alpha2 subunit. The mass-shifted 270 kDa alpha2 species was also immunopositive for the alpha1 subunit, further confirming the presence of mixed alpha2-alpha1 receptors. Both the alpha1 720 kDa band, and the alpha2 750 kDa band were immunopositive for beta2 spectrin, however more beta2 spectrin was observed with purified alpha1 receptors. In contrast, beta4 spectrin was only observed in the alpha2 750 kDa band and was absent from the alpha1 720 kDa band. The observed band at 600 kDa is likely to be either a non-specific band or a protein complex containing Sptbn4 spectrin that is not associated with either GABAAR subtype at the point of protein complex resolution by BN-PAGE, as it does not resolve at the same molecular weight as either GABAAR subtype. beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin were not observed at lower molecular weights, confirming their protein complexes with GABAARs remained intact.
Molecules that regulate the membrane trafficking and synaptic accumulation of GABAARs mediate their effects via binding to the major intracellular domains of receptor subunits. Thus, we examine if these domains are capable of binding spectrins when expressed as glutathione-S transferase fusion proteins (GST). To test for possible interactions with spectrin isoforms the GST fusion proteins encoding the intracellular domains of the alpha1, alpha2, and alpha4 subunits (along with GST alone as a control) were exposed to murine purified plasma membrane lysates and bound material was eluted, resolved by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted (Fig. 4b). beta2 spectrin was detected binding to the intracellular domain of the alpha1 subunit but significantly less to alpha2 subunit (p < 0.000648278) and the alpha4 subunit (p < 0.00126715). No binding was observed to GST alone. In contrast, beta4 spectrin specifically bound to the alpha2 subunit compared to the alpha1 subunit (p = 0.020606747), with none associated with alpha4 or GST alone.
In addition to the in vitro binding studies, we analyzed the subcellular distribution of beta2 spectrin, beta4 spectrin and synaptic GABAARs in cultured neurons from pHalpha2 mice (Fig. 4c). alpha1 and alpha2 were found at inhibitory synapses on dendrites, marked by opposition to the inhibitory presynaptic marker protein; VGAT. Most of these dendritic puncta also contained beta2 spectrin immunoreactivity. In mature neurons beta4 spectrin is highly enriched in the AIS and, consistent with this, immunoreactivity for beta4 spectrin was limited to this structure in our cultures. In these structures puncta of GABAARs containing both the alpha1 and alpha2 subunits also contained beta4 spectrin immunoreactivity.
Taken together, these results suggest that beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin are capable of selective binding to the intracellular domains of the GABAAR alpha1 and alpha2 subunits, respectively. They also suggest that beta2 spectrin is found at or close to inhibitory synapses on dendrites, while beta4 spectrin is associated with GABAARs on the AIS.
Examining the role that beta2 spectrin plays in regulating GABAAR accumulation at synapses
Determining the role that SPBTN1 plays in regulating GABAAR expression levels and synaptic accumulation.
a) Primary cultured pHalpha2xSPTBN1Flox mouse neurons were infected with either AAV-GFP or AAV-GFP-Cre to create nuclear-restricted GFP-labelled beta2 spectrin+/+ or beta2 spectrin-/- cultures respectively. At DIV 21 the cells were lysed, the proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE, and immunoblots carried out. Densitometry was carried out to quantify the differences in expression of key proteins between beta2 spectrin+/+ or beta2 spectrin-/- cultures (Representative images from n = 3, n = 3 for densitometry analysis *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001). b) Representative images of beta2 spectrin+/+ and beta2 spectrin-/- DIV21 primary cultured neurons, fixed, permeabilized, and immunostained for VGAT and Gephyrin. Scale bar = 10 mum and 2 mum in cropped images. Synapses were determined by VGAT and Gephyrin colocalization, counted, and normalized to the length of the measured processes (n = 16 from 4 individual cultures, ***p < 0.001). Error bars represent the SEM. The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 7. The raw membrane/gel images are shown in Supplementary Figure 4.
To evaluate the importance of spectrin localization at inhibitory synapses we prepared primary cultured neurons from SPTBN1 floxed mice (SPTBN1Flox). At DIV3, the cultures were infected with adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) expressing fluorescent GFP and Cre recombinase under the control of the CaMKIIalpha promoter (AAV9-CaMKII-eGFP-Cre; AAV-Cre) or a virus expressing GFP alone (AAV9-CaMKII-eGFP; AAV-GFP). The CaMKII promoter was used to restrict expression of the respective transgenes to principal neurons. The AAV-GFP and AAV-Cre viral infection allowed us to study conditional beta2 spectrin-/- and beta2 spectrin+/+ cells respectively. At DIV18-21, neurons were lysed, and subject to immunoblotting (Fig. 5a). beta2 spectrin levels were significantly reduced in beta2 spectrin-/- neurons to approximately 50% of control (p = 0.000052). Interestingly, beta4 spectrin levels were significantly increased (p = 0.024824603) to approximately 150% of control. This result agrees with previous studies suggesting a reciprocal relationship between the expression levels of these distinct spectrin isoforms. In contrast, the levels of alpha2 spectrin, a core component of spectrin heterodimers, was unaltered (p = 0.110899224) along with the expression of Gphn (p = 0.74196358) and VGAT (p = 0.091484159). Likewise, the expression levels of the GABAAR alpha1 (p = 0.14525492) and alpha2 (p = 0.565935661) subunits were unaffected by reducing beta2 spectrin expression.
We also measured how the modifications in beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin effected inhibitory synapse density using immunostaining. DIV 18-21 beta2 spectrin-/- and beta2 spectrin+/+ cells were fixed, permeabilized and immunostained for VGAT and Gephyrin. Inhibitory synapses were defined by VGAT positivity opposing Gephyrin positivity. The dendritic synapse density was significantly reduced (p = 0.0000054726) by approximately 50% in beta2 spectrin-/- neurons (Fig. 5b).
Ablating beta2 spectrin expression differentially impacts GABAAR accumulation on the AIS and dendrites
Examining the effects of ablating beta2 spectrin expression on GABAAR accumulation at the AIS and dendrites.
a) Representative images of DIV21 beta2 spectrin+/+ and beta2 spectrin-/- neuronal cultures, fixed, permeabilized and immunostained for alpha1, alpha2, and AnkG. The AIS and dendritic regions were determined by AnkG positivity or negativity respectively. Scale bar = 10 mum and 2 mum in cropped images (n = 16 from 4 individual cultures). b) Puncta of alpha1 and alpha2 were counted in the AIS and dendritic regions of interest and normalized to the length of the measured processes (n = 16 from 4 individual cultures, ***p < 0.001). Error bars represent the SEM. The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 8.
Having established that beta2 spectrin and beta4 spectrin preferentially associate with the alpha1 and alpha2 GABAAR subunits, respectively, we studied the effect of reducing beta2 spectrin expression, and the observed compensatory increase in beta4 spectrin expression on the density of alpha1 and alpha2 GABAAR puncta in the dendrites and AIS of primary cultured neurons (Fig. 6a, b). On the AIS, beta2 spectrin-/- neurons had a significantly lower (p = 0.000084651) density of approximately 50% alpha1 puncta compared to beta2 spectrin+/+ neurons. This was accompanied by a significant increase (p = 0.00012195) in the density of alpha2 puncta of approximately 50%. There was a similar significant reduction (p = 0.00040454) in alpha1 puncta in the dendritic compartment of beta2 spectrin-/- neurons, where they were reduced by approximately 60%. This was again accompanied by a significant (p = 0.00053214) 50% increase in the density of alpha2 puncta.
Taken together, these results suggest that reducing beta2 spectrin expression, which subsequently increases beta4 spectrin expression, specifically reduces the synaptic accumulation of the alpha1 subunit containing GABAARs and increases the accumulation of the alpha2 subunit containing GABAARs in both the AIS and dendritic compartments.
Reducing beta2 spectrin expression modifies the amplitude of inhibitory synaptic currents
Determining the effects of beta2 spectrin ablation on the properties of inhibitory synaptic currents.
a) Representative mIPSCs from DIV 18-22 neurons cultured from SPTBN1Flox mice infected with AAV-GFP (black) or AAV-GFP-Cre (red) to create Sptbn1+/+ or Sptbn1-/- cultures respectively. b) Bar graphs show average mIPSC peak amplitude (pA), weighted decay tau (ms), and frequency (Hz). Only mIPSC amplitude was significantly larger in Sptbn1-/- neurons (**, significantly different from control, P = 0.03734, n = 5-7 cells). c) Frequency distribution of mIPSC events of different amplitudes (p = 0.02556; n = 5-7 cells). Error bars represent the SEM. The raw data are contained in Supplementary Data 9.
Our biochemical and immunostaining experiments revealed modifications in the clustering of GABAARs consisting of different alpha subunits on dendrites and on the AIS in neurons deficient in beta2 spectrin. To determine if these modifications impacted the inhibitory synaptic signaling we compared the properties of miniature inhibitory synaptic currents (mIPSCs) in primary neurons cultured from SPTBN1Flox mice infected with AAVs expressing Cre recombinase (Fig. 7a). Compared to control cells, mIPSC average peak amplitudes were increased in Cre expressing neurons (p = 0.03734) while their frequency and decay rates were unaltered (Fig. 7b). Consistent with the increase in mIPSC average peak amplitudes, we observed a pronounced rightward shift in the cumulative distribution of mIPSC amplitude (Fig. 7c) (p = 0.02556). The difference in amplitude between beta2 spectrin-/- and beta2 spectrin+/+ neurons complements our previous results showing alterations in the balance of GABAAR alpha subunit expression in beta2 spectrin-/- neurons. Our results indicate that reduction of beta2 spectrin expression in neurons significantly increases the amplitude of inhibitory synaptic currents.
Discussion
Neurons have the capacity to differentially target specific GABAAR subtypes to dendritic and axo-axonic synapses. Immunolocalization studies suggest that receptors containing the alpha1 subunit are predominantly found at dendritic synapses, while the alpha2 subunit is enriched at their equivalents on the axon initial segment (AIS).
To explore the underlying mechanisms further, we used immunopurification, coupled with BN-PAGE to isolate native populations of GABAARs assembled from alpha1 and alpha2 subunits. Using quantitative mass spectroscopy their subunit composition and the components of their associated proteomes were compared. Our results revealed that the majority of the alpha1 subunit co-purified with the beta1-3 and gamma2 subunits. Lower, but significant levels of the alpha2 and alpha3 subunits were also detected. Consistent with this, comparable levels of the alpha1 subunit co-purified with the alpha2 subunit. Thus, neurons express a large population GABAARs containing alpha1 together with the beta1-3 and gamma2 subunits. They further suggest that the majority of alpha2 receptors also contain the alpha1 subunit. Consistent with our biochemical studies, immunostaining revealed that receptors containing both the alpha1 and alpha2 subunits were enriched on the AIS, while those containing just alpha1 subunit were predominantly found within dendrites. The existence of alpha2alpha1 receptors expressed in high abundance has multi-faceted implications. Depending on the subunit arrangement, GABA and benzodiazepine sensitivity could be altered relative to alpha1/alpha1 or alpha2/alpha2 receptors. The presence of the alpha1 subunit would also confer higher gephyrin affinity to alpha2-containing receptors, potentially altering their synaptic stability.
To gain insights into the mechanisms that orchestrate the subcellular targeting of GABAARs, the proteins that co-purified with these specific subtypes were compared. We identified sets of highly reproducible alpha1 and alpha2 receptor-binding proteins that including known GABAAR interactors, such as gephyrin, and Cyfip2. High levels of spectrins were associated with alpha1 and alpha2 receptor subtypes as high molecular mass complexes. In neurons, spectrin tetramers consisting of alpha2 spectrin and a variable beta spectrin that create a sub-membranous lattice that interacts with the actin cytoskeleton. As measured by LC-MS/MS, alpha2 spectrin was co-purified with both GABAAR subtypes while beta2 spectrin was enriched with those containing alpha1 subunits. In contrast, beta4 spectrin was only associated with GABAARs containing the alpha2 subunit. In vitro binding demonstrated that beta2 spectrin preferentially bound to the ICD of the alpha1 subunit, while beta4 spectrin specifically bound to the corresponding region of the alpha2-ICD. beta4 spectrin is enriched at the AIS and has been shown to be recruited to this structure by AnkG which also co-purified with GABAARs. Consistent with this the GABAAR alpha2 subunit was enriched on the AIS with beta4 spectrin. In contrast, beta2 spectrin was enriched at dendritic inhibitory synapses together with the alpha1 subunit. Further studies will be required to determine if these interactions are direct or via an intermediate, such as gephyrin, collybistin or GABARAP.
To assess the importance of spectrins for the formation of inhibitory synapses we used neurons in which beta2 spectrin expression had been conditionally ablated. As previously observed, neurons lacking beta2 spectrin showed a compensatory increase in beta4 spectrin expression (Fig. 5), with a more dispersed staining pattern and a longer, more disorganized AIS. While the balance of beta spectrin isoforms was disrupted, no change was observed in the expression of the alpha spectrin isoform; alpha2 spectrin, or the expression of alpha1 or alpha2 GABAAR subunits. Decreasing beta2 spectrin levels reduced the number of dendritic synapses containing the alpha1 GABAAR subunit. In contrast alpha2 subunit puncta on the AIS and dendrites were increased. As no change in the total expression of the alpha1 or alpha2 GABAAR subunits were observed, the disruption of beta spectrin balance did not affect gross GABAAR subunit expression. Rather, the synapse targeting changes observed in alpha1 and alpha2 GABAARs could be the function of one or several cellular processes, including altered endocytosis, exocytosis, or synapse confinement directly, similar to the molecular functions of gephyrin. This redistribution of alpha1 and alpha2 GABAAR synapse targeting resulted in changes in neuronal electrophysiological properties. Whole-cell recording, using seals on the cell body are biased for events on the soma and AIS due to space clamp limitations. Therefore, the demonstrated increase in the amplitude of inhibitory synaptic currents is likely to a product of increased alpha2 GABAAR expression on the AIS.
Collectively our studies demonstrate an integral role for spectrins in orchestrating the synapse-specific targeting of GABAARs, a process that determines the efficacy of fast neuronal inhibition. Spectrinopathies have debilitating neurological features, often characterized by refractory seizures and epilepsies. Therefore, these phenotypes may arise in part from deficits in the formation of inhibitory synapses.
Methods
Animals
Animal studies were performed according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Tufts Medical Center. 8-12-week-old C57BL/6 male and female mice were kept on a 12 h light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and water. Transgenic mice expressing the phluorin-myc n-terminal modification of the alpha2 subunit (pHalpha2) were created as previously described.
Antibodies
The following antibodies were used for immunoprecipitation (IP), immunoblot (IB) or immunocytochemistry (ICC): Gabra1 (IP, IB - 1:1000, mouse, Antibodies Inc 75-136), myc (IP, mouse, Thermo Scientific PIER88843), GFP (IB - 1:1000, rabbit, Cell Signaling 2956), GFP (ICC - 1:1000, chicken, Abcam ab13970), AnkG (ICC - 1:1000, rabbit, SYSY 386003), VGAT (IB - 1:1000, ICC - 1:1000, guinea pig, SYSY 131004), beta2 spectrin (IB - 1:1000, ICC0 - 1:500, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich SAB4200662), beta4 spectrin (IB - 1:1000, ICC - 1:500, mouse, Antibodies Inc 75-377), Gabra1 (ICC - 1:1000, rabbit, Abcam ab33299), beta-actin (IB - 1:5000, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich A1978), alpha2 spectrin (IB - 1:1000, rabbit, Cell Signaling 2122), Gephyrin (IB - 1:1000, rabbit, Cell Signaling 14304).
Plasma membrane isolation
Plasma membrane isolation was carried out as previously described. Briefly, murine forebrain (from 7 mice) was isolated in dissection buffer (225 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4) on ice. The tissue was transferred to homogenization buffer stored on ice containing; 225 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 0.5% (wt/vol) BSA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 supplemented with mini cOmplete protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP. The brains were homogenized using 14 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer. All the following centrifugation steps were carried out at 4 degreesC. The samples were initially centrifuged at 800 x g for 5 min to facilitate the removal of nuclei and non-lysed cells. After discarding the pellet, the supernatant was spun again at 800 x g for 5 min to remove residual nuclei and non-lysed cells. The supernatant then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min to remove mitochondria. The pellet was discarded, and the supernatant spun again at 10,000 x g for 10 min to remove mitochondrial contamination. The plasma membrane fraction was then pelleted at 25,000 x g for 20 min. Following resuspension in starting buffer, the plasma membrane fraction was spun again at 25,000 x g for 20 min to remove cytosolic and ER/Golgi contamination.
Immunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitations (IPs) were carried out as previously described. Briefly, anti-c-myc beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-Tween) and resuspended in PBS-Tween containing non-immune IgG or with antibodies against the alpha1 subunit respectively. The antibody concentration was experimentally predetermined (Supplementary Figure 1). For alpha1 IPs, the antibody was crosslinked onto the beads by washing twice with 0.2 M triethanolamine (pH 8.2) (TEA), and then incubated for 30 min with 40 mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) in TEA at room temperature. The beads were transferred to 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and incubated at room temperature for a further 15 min. The beads were washed three times with PBS-Tween and resuspended in solubilized plasma membranes in ice-cold Triton lysis buffer, supplemented with mini cOmplete protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP. The immunoprecipitation reaction was incubated overnight at 4 degreesC. The beads were then washed three times with PBS-Tween and eluted either with 2x sample buffer (for SDS-PAGE) or soft elution buffer [0.2% (wt/vol) SDS, 0.1% Tween-20, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 8.0] (for BN-PAGE).
GST-Fusion protein pulldown
GST-fusion proteins for the intracellular domains (ICDs) of alpha1, alpha2, and alpha4 were synthesized in E. coli and immobilized on magnetic glutathione beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). These were washed 3 times with PBS-Tween and incubated with plasma membrane fractions solubilized in Triton lysis buffer overnight at 4 degreesC. The beads were washed 3 times in 0.05% PBS-Tween and the proteins eluted in 2x sample buffer.
BN-PAGE
BN-PAGE was carried out as previously described. Briefly, protein samples were eluted in soft elution buffer and 4x NativePAGE sample buffer and G250 additive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added. Samples were loaded onto NativePAGE gradient gels (4-16%) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gels were run for 2-3 h followed by preparation for Coomassie staining or immunoblotting.
SDS-PAGE
SDS-PAGE was carried out as previously described. Briefly, protein Bradford assays (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, United States) were carried out to measure and subsequently normalize protein concentration. Samples were diluted in 2x sample buffer and 5-100 mug of protein was loaded onto a 7-15% tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel depending on the molecular mass and relative abundance of the target protein.
Coomassie staining
The gels were sealed throughout this process to prevent contamination. Gels containing resolved proteins were fixed in 50% ethanol and 10% acetic acid, washed in 30% ethanol, washed in molecular grade ultrapure water, then stained with EZ blue stain at room temperature for 2-24 h. The gels were destained in molecular grade ultrapure water and imaged using a ChemiDoc MP (Bio-Rad). Bands of interest were excised for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
Immunoblotting
Following BN-PAGE or SDS-PAGE, proteins were transferred to PVDF or nitrocellulose membranes respectively. PVDF membranes were fixed in 8% acetic acid, washed with molecular grade ultrapure water, air-dried, and destained with 100% methanol. PVDF and nitrocellulose membranes were prepared for immunoblotting in the same way from this point onwards. Membranes were blocked in 5% milk in tris-buffered saline 0.1% Tween-20 (TBS-T) for 1 h, washed with TBS-T, and then probed with primary antibodies prepared in TBS-T overnight (see the antibodies section for dilution information). The membranes were washed and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000 - Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, United States). The blots were developed using Pierce ECL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged using a ChemiDoc MP (Bio-Rad). Band intensity was compared to alpha-tubulin or beta-actin as a loading control. Resolved protein bands from raw images were analyzed Fiji. Where possible, biological replicates were run on the same gels for comparison, and the area under the curve was calculated for each band. Average signal and standard error of the mean (SEM) were calculated for each treatment group and ANOVA or t-test carried out as appropriate using R for statistical comparison of protein expression.
Primary neuron culture
Mixed cortical and hippocampal primary neuron culture was carried out as previously described. Briefly, P0 mice were anesthetized on ice and the brains removed and dissected in Hank's buffered salt solution (HBSS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES. The dissected tissue was trypsinized and triturated to dissociate the neurons. Viable cells were counted using a hemocytometer and trypan blue staining, followed by plated on pre-coated poly-l-lysine-coated 13 mm coverslips in 24-well plate wells at a density of 2 x 105 cells/ml in Neurobasal media (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cre-mediated knockout of SPTBN1 in SPTBN1Flox neurons was carried out using AAVs. Briefly, at days in vitro (DIV) 3, 105 genomic copies per cell of CamKII-AAV9-GFP (Addgene, Watertown, MA, United States) were added to the neuronal media. After 24 h, the media was replaced with conditioned media. The cells were harvested for ICC or IB at DIV18-21.
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemistry was carried out as previously described. Briefly, DIV18-21 primary cultured neurons were fixed for 10 minutes in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. The cells were permeabilized for 1 h in blocking solution - 50:50 mixture of 5% BSA in PBS and normal goat serum (NGS). The cells were probed with primary and then fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488, 555, and 647; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 405 Dylight; Jackson ImmunoResearch) diluted in blocking solution for 1 h each at room temperature (see antibodies section for dilution information). The coverslips were washed in PBS, dried, and mounted onto microscope slides with Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech, Birmingham, AL, United States). The samples were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse Ti (Nikon Instruments, Melville, NY, United States) confocal microscope using a 60x oil immersion objective lens. Synapse counts and colocalization studies were carried out as previously described. Briefly, analysis was performed using the Synapse Counter plugin in the FIJI software package. 1024 x 1024 images were auto-thresholded using the Otsu Thresholding method. The rolling ball radius (background subtraction) and maximum filter parameters were set to 7 and 1, respectively. Default colocalization settings were used that accept 33-100% overlap between pre- (VGAT) and post-synaptic (Gephyrin) markers. Average overlap and standard error of the mean (SEM) were calculated for each treatment group and ANOVA/t-test carried out as appropriate using R for statistical comparison.
Electrophysiology
Whole-cell recordings were conducted at 32 degreesC in bath saline solution (140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 11 mM glucose, pH to 7.4 with NaOH). To examine miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents (mIPSCs), 0.3 muM tetrodotoxin (TTX) was added to the bath solution and cells continuously perfused with DNQX (20muM, 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione) and AP5 (50muM dl-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid) to block glutamatergic excitatory synaptic transmission. Recording pipettes (5-7 MOmega) were pulled from borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments) and filled with internal solution (140 mM CsCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM Mg-ATP, 4 mM NaCl, 0.3 mM Na-GTP, pH to 7.2 with CsOH). Recordings of mIPSCs were obtained after a 5-minute stabilization period upon establishing a whole-cell configuration. Current recordings were low-pass filtered at 2 kHz with an Axopatch 200B amplifier (Molecular Devices) and analyzed with Clampex 10 software (Molecular Devices). Cells were omitted from analysis if their access or series resistances changed by >20%. Individual mIPSC events were visually inspected and were accepted based on having a stable baseline, sharp rising phase, and a single peak. Only recordings with a minimum of 200 events fitting these criteria were used for analysis. mIPSC amplitude and frequency from each experimental condition were combined and expressed as mean +/- SEM. mIPSC decay times were averaged from 100 consecutive events, fit to a double exponential, and weighted decay tau (tau) obtained. Statistical analysis for average mIPSC kinetics was performed using the unpaired T-test where p < 0.05 is considered significant. mIPSC amplitudes were fitted with a Gaussian function:
Equation 1. Gaussian function used to fit mIPSC amplitudes.
For n components, the fit solves for the amplitude A, the Gaussian mean amplitude current micro, the Gaussian standard deviation sigma and the constant y-offset C for each component i.
The experimental numbers used were determined from the following power analysis based on actual data from previous experiments (Nakamura et al., 2016, Nathanson et al., 2019 Kontou et al., 2021); Difference in Means = 0.400, Standard Deviation = 0.1500, Power = 0.950, Alpha = 0.0500 demonstrating that 4 replicates of each group are required to reach statistical significance.
Protein Analysis by LC-MS/MS
Quantitative label-free proteomic analysis was carried out as previously described. The gel bands of interest were excised and cut into 1 mm3 pieces. Following in-gel trypsin digestion, the gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min and dried in a speed-vac. The gel pieces were then rehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/mul modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, United States) and incubated for 45 min at 4 degreesC. The trypsin solution was removed, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution added and incubated at 37 degreesC overnight. The peptides were extracted by washing with 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid and the extracts were dried in a speed-vac for 1 hour. Prior to analysis the samples were stored at 4 degreesC, then reconstituted in 5-10 mul of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 mum C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 mum inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. The column was equilibrated, and each sample was loaded using a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA, United States) onto the column. A gradient was formed between solvent A, and increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water, and 0.1% formic acid). Acquisition time was 16-79 min. As peptides were eluted, they were subjected to Nanospray ionization (NSI) and then entered an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, United States). An MS1 value of 70k was used, with a scan range of m/z 85-2000, and charge-state screening parameters set to +2 to +5. A centroid acquisition mode was used, with a precursor ion isolation window of 2 m/z and 35% normalized collision energy. Eluting peptides were detected and the most intense were isolated using the Top 10 scan mode and fragmented by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a resolution of 17.5 k and the dynamic exclusion settings was used to analyze MS2 ions, with a 30 s repeat duration, 60 s exclusion duration, n = 1, 10 ppm mass width, to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.
Peptide/protein searches
Raw MS data processing was carried out as previously described. Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide database sequences with the acquired fragmentation pattern using the MSGF + . Raw.mzXML files were used to interrogate the UniProt mouse reference proteome (last modified May 4th 2020, containing 21989 sequences) also containing with the Thermo list of common contaminants. The search was carried out using settings for high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometers, tryptic digestion, no limit to enzyme missed cleavages, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, charge states of +2 to +5, minimum and maximum peptide lengths of 6-40 amino acids in length, respectively, and a fixed modification of standard amino acids with carbamidomethyl (C + 57). Peptide identification was scored by MSGF + Q- (PSM-level target-decoy approach) and E- (expected number of peptides in a random database) scores. These were used for quality control in the initial protein screening process for associated proteins, and phospho-modified peptide screening.
Proteomic data analysis
The resulting .mzID files from the spectral searches were combined with .mzXML files using the MSnbase package in R (accessed July 20th 2020), and used to measure the spectral index normalized to global intensity (SIGI) for each protein. This has previously been shown to be an effective measurement for label-free protein quantification and to normalize replicate data, accounting for inter-run variability. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium databse via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD038703 and 10.6019/PXD038703. The SiGi was calculated for each protein using all the of the detected peptides for each protein. After these individual features were combined, a Welch t-test was performed comparing the SiGi for each protein detected by MS that immunoprecipitated with the alpha1 or alpha2 receptors compared to the SiGi in their equivalent control. For the alpha1 receptor IP, the control was non-immune IgG bound to protein G Dynabeads. For the alpha2 receptor IP, the control was anti-myc Dynabeads with wildtype tissue, rather than tissue from the pHalpha2 mouse. Significantly enriched proteins were those with a subsequent p value lower than 0.05. Venn diagrams were produced using the Vennerable package in R (accessed January 10th, 2019), and only significantly detected proteins in all repeats were considered for downstream analysis. The SIGI values for proteins contained within each gel band were normalized by z-transformation and used for principal Component Analysis (PCA), which was carried out using PCA functions in the ggfortify package in R (accessed January 10th, 2019). The protein lists were compared against the latest version of the STRINGdb database to establish known interactions and annotations for each protein using only high confidence, experimental evidence. Functional protein information, specifically the highest scoring Biological Process Gene Ontology terms, were extracted for each protein using the "mygene" package in R (accessed July 29th, 2020). The interaction for each protein with alpha1 or alpha2 was imputed, and network diagrams were constructed in R using the igraph package and the nodes were scaled to the SIGI values for each protein (accessed February 1st, 2019).
Statistics and reproducibility
The results are expressed as mean +/- the standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical comparisons were carried out between two groups using Student's t test. For proteomic data comparisons, a Welch t test was used as it is more robust for comparing groups with samples of unequal variance. All replicates are independent biological replicates. For proteomic experiments, n = 4-7 was used, where each n was derived from fractionated samples derived from 7 mice. For immunoblot experiments, n = 3-4 was used, where samples were either derived from fractionated samples derived from 7 mice, or from individual primary cultured neurons from 6-12 pups. For immunocytochemistry experiments, n = 4 individual cultures was used when quantifications were carried out with broad aspect, low magnification images. When high magnification images were required, n = 16 was used derived from individual viral exposures from at least 4 individual primary cultures.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Supplementary information
Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s42003-022-04381-x.
Author contributions
J.L.S. and S.J.M. conceptualized the project and wrote the paper. J.L.S., N.C., J.N., C.C., A.L., S.C. performed experiments. J.D., C.B., C.Z. provided and managed the animal colonies. M.R. and P.D. edited the paper.
Peer review
Peer review information
Communications Biology thanks Chao Wang and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: George Inglis. Peer reviewer reports are available.
