Decapping factor Dcp2 controls mRNA abundance and translation to adjust metabolism and filamentation to nutrient availability. 
Degradation of most yeast mRNAs involves decapping by Dcp1/Dcp2. DEAD-box protein Dhh1 has been implicated as an activator of decapping, in coupling codon non-optimality to enhanced degradation, and as a translational repressor, but its functions in cells are incompletely understood. RNA-Seq analyses coupled with CAGE sequencing of all capped mRNAs revealed increased abundance of hundreds of mRNAs in dcp2Delta cells that appears to result directly from impaired decapping rather than elevated transcription. Interestingly, only a subset of mRNAs requires Dhh1 for targeting by Dcp2, and also generally requires the other decapping activators Pat1, Edc3, or Scd6; whereas most of the remaining transcripts utilize nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factors for Dcp2-mediated turnover. Neither inefficient translation initiation nor stalled elongation appears to be a major driver of Dhh1-enhanced mRNA degradation. Surprisingly, ribosome profiling revealed that dcp2Delta confers widespread changes in relative translational efficiencies (TEs) that generally favor well-translated mRNAs. Because ribosome biogenesis is reduced while capped mRNA abundance is increased by dcp2Delta, we propose that an increased ratio of mRNA to ribosomes increases competition among mRNAs for limiting ribosomes to favor efficiently translated mRNAs in dcp2Delta cells. Interestingly, genes involved in respiration or utilization of alternative carbon or nitrogen sources are upregulated, and both mitochondrial function and cell filamentation are elevated in dcp2Delta cells, suggesting that decapping sculpts gene expression post-transcriptionally to fine-tune metabolic pathways and morphological transitions according to nutrient availability.
Introduction
The translation and degradation of mRNAs are intertwined, as the 5' m7G cap and 3' poly(A) tail are involved in both mechanisms. In general, translation is initiated by association of initiation factors eIF4E and eIF4G with the capped 5' end of mRNA followed by recruitment of the small (40S) subunit of the ribosome pre-loaded with other initiation factors and initiator methionyl tRNA. Interaction between eIF4G and poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) stabilizes a 'closed-loop' mRNP conformation that both protects the mRNA from degradation and enhances translation. In yeast, degradation is generally initiated by shortening of the poly(A) tail (deadenylation), catalyzed by the Pan2/Pan3 and Ccr4-Not deadenylase complexes. Deadenylation is followed by either 3' to 5' exonucleolytic degradation by the cytoplasmic exosome or decapping by the Dcp1/Dcp2 holoenzyme with attendant 5' to 3' degradation by the exoribonuclease Xrn1. Dcp2-mediated decapping is critical for multiple mRNA decay pathways including bulk 5' to 3' decay, nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) triggered by premature termination codons, AU-rich mRNA decay, microRNA-mediated turnover, and transcript-specific degradation.
Dcp2 consists of an N-terminal regulatory domain (NRD) followed by a Nudix superfamily hydrolase domain, attached to an intrinsically disordered C-terminal region (IDR) that contains short leucine-rich helical motifs (HLMs). Dcp1 enhances Dcp2 catalytic activity by interacting with the Dcp2 NRD and is essential for mRNA decapping in vivo. Although Dcp1 promotes the closed conformation of Dcp2, the active site is not fully formed and the RNA-binding site is blocked by the NRD, thus forming a catalytically incompetent enzyme complex. Additional factors stimulate the catalytic activity of the Dcp1/Dcp2 complex, including enhancer of decapping (Edc) proteins. Interaction of Dcp1 with yeast Edc2 stabilizes the active conformation of the Dcp1/Dcp2 complex. Autoinhibitory motifs in the IDR interact with the core domain of Dcp2 and stabilize the inactive conformation of Dcp2. Edc1 alone cannot overcome the inhibitory effect of the IDR, requiring additional stimulation by Edc3. The LSm domain of Edc3 binds to HLMs located in the IDR and activates decapping by alleviating autoinhibition and promoting RNA binding by Dcp2 in yeast, and deleting the autoinhibitory region bypasses activation by Edc3.
Dhh1, Pat1, Scd6, and Lsm1-7 also activate Dcp1/Dcp2. Edc3 and Scd6 may act interchangeably in recruiting Dhh1 to the same segment of the Dcp2 IDR. HLMs in Dcp2 additionally mediate interaction with Pat1, although the Pat1/Lsm1-7 complex can also bind to the 3' ends of deadenylated mRNAs to stimulate decapping. Numerous contacts were identified among the decapping activators, as Dhh1 interacts with Pat1, Scd6, and Edc3, and Pat1 interacts with Scd6 in addition to Lsm1-7, as well as with Xrn1. Interestingly, Dhh1 and the Pat1/Lsm1-7 complex appear to target distinct subsets of mRNAs with overlapping substrate specificities. From these results and others, it can be proposed that the decapping activators assemble distinct decapping complexes that target different subsets of mRNAs for degradation. Dhh1, Pat1, Scd6, and Lsm1-7, along with Dcp1/Dcp2, are found concentrated in processing bodies (PBs) with translationally repressed mRNAs, consistent with a role in translational repression in addition to mRNA turnover. Recently, Edc3 and Scd6 were shown to retain Dcp2 in the cytoplasm, preventing import of Dcp1/Dcp2 into the nucleus where it cannot function in cytoplasmic mRNA decay. Thus, decapping activators can stimulate decapping by multiple, distinct mechanisms.
Dhh1 is a conserved ATP-dependent DEAD-box helicase involved in translation repression and mRNA decay in yeast. Dhh1 and its orthologs in Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Ste13), Caenorhabditis elegans (CGH-1), Xenopus laevis (Xp54), Drosophila melanogaster (Me31b), and mammals (RCK/p54) interact with factors involved in deadenylation, decapping and translational repression. Dhh1 promotes decapping-mediated mRNA turnover, as deadenylated capped mRNAs are stabilized in dhh1Delta cells. Moreover, recombinant Dhh1 stimulates the decapping activity of the purified decapping enzyme. The mRNAs preferentially targeted for decay by Dhh1 or Pat1/Lsm1-7 appear to be inefficiently translated at the elongation stage.
Although most yeast mRNAs are targeted by a common degradation pathway, the half-lives of individual mRNAs vary greatly. Specific sequence and structural elements present in 5' or 3' UTRs, and poly(A) tail lengths, can modulate the degradation rate; however, these features alone do not explain the variation in half-lives among all transcripts. Recently, codon optimality--the balance between the supply of charged tRNA molecules in the cytoplasmic pool and the demand of tRNA usage by translating ribosomes--was identified as a determinant of mRNA decay. Evidence indicates that non-optimal codons, which are decoded by ribosomes more slowly than optimal codons, accelerate mRNA decay co-translationally. Multiple lines of evidence support the model that Dhh1 binds to ribosomes elongating slowly through non-optimum codons to trigger decapping and degradation. Recently, cryo-EM analysis revealed that the N-terminal region of Not5 interacts with the E-site of ribosomes stalled at suboptimal codons with an empty A-site, leading to the model that ribosomes stalled at suboptimal codons are detected by Not5/Caf1 and targeted for degradation via Dhh1. Much of the evidence indicating that codon non-optimality is a major determinant of mRNA instability derives from reporter transcripts with relatively long strings of non-optimal or optimal codons, which likely does not pertain to many native mRNAs.
A different model proposes that translation initiation and decay are inversely related, with functional initiation complexes impeding both decapping and deadenylation. Thus, mutations impairing the cap-binding eIF4F complex or initiation factor eIF3 that reduce translation initiation accelerate degradation of particular yeast mRNAs via elevated deadenylation and decapping. Strong secondary structures in the 5' UTR and poor start codon context increased decapping. Moreover, binding of eIF4E to the cap structure was sufficient to inhibit decapping by Dcp1/Dcp2. From these findings it can be predicted that translation initiation, directly or indirectly, competes with the decay machinery in a manner that influences mRNA turnover rates. Indeed, non-invasive measurements of mRNA half-lives suggested that competition between translation initiation and mRNA decay factors is a major determinant of yeast mRNA turnover, whereas global inhibition of elongation generally led to stabilization vs. degradation of transcripts.
Starving yeast for glucose engenders a rapid loss of protein synthesis, accompanied by a shift of mRNAs from polysomes to free mRNPs and an increase in both size and number of PBs. Deletion of DHH1 or PAT1 partially impaired the loss of polysomes evoked by glucose depletion, whereas deletion of both genes simultaneously abrogated translational repression, indicating that both Dhh1 and Pat1 are required for repression of translation initiation during glucose starvation. Furthermore, overexpression of Dhh1 or Pat1 in wild-type (WT) cells conferred a general repression of translation with attendant PB formation. These findings suggested that Dhh1 and Pat1 act as general repressors of translation in glucose-starved yeast. Consistent with this, Dhh1 can inhibit translation initiation in vitro by blocking assembly of 48S preinitiation complexes (PICs). Alternatively, the recovery of polysomes during stress in dhh1increment and pat1increment mutants could result indirectly from a broad stabilization of mRNAs that helps to restore 48 S PIC assembly by mass action and overcome inhibition of PIC formation during stress produced by other means. Indeed, impairing the functions of RNA helicases eIF4A and Ded1, which normally stimulate 48S PIC assembly, is involved in suppressing translation during stress. Other evidence indictes that Dhh1 can directly impede translation elongation by associating with slowly moving ribosomes. Consistent with this, the Not4 subunit of Ccr4-Not complex, as well as Dhh1 and Dcp1, were implicated in translational repression of mRNAs that exhibit transient ribosome stalling in a manner that limits protein misfolding during nutrient limitation. Together, these findings suggest that multiple factors that stimulate mRNA decay can also repress translation at the initiation or elongation steps during nutrient starvation. Interestingly, Dhh1 helicase activity was reported to enhance, not repress, translation of ATG1 and ATG13 mRNAs required for autophagy during nitrogen starvation. Ribosome profiling of dhh1Delta cells grown in rich medium uncovered hundreds of mRNAs displaying either increased or decreased relative TEs, suggesting that Dhh1 can function as a translational repressor or activator for distinct sets of mRNAs, even in nonstarvation conditions.
Based on its central role in mRNA decapping, most studies on Dcp2 have focused primarily on mRNA decay, and the participation of Dcp2 in regulating translation is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that in nutrient-replete cells Dcp2 modulates translation in addition to mRNA turnover by pathways both dependent and independent of decapping activator Dhh1. Surprisingly, a large fraction of mRNAs appear to be targeted for degradation by Dcp2 independently of Dhh1, Pat1, Edc3, or Scd6, which are enriched for NMD substrates; whereas the remaining fraction is controlled concurrently by all four decapping activators. Codon non-optimality does not appear to be a major driver of mRNA degradation for either set of Dcp2-targeted mRNAs. Unexpectedly, ribosome profiling revealed that dcp2Delta confers widespread TE changes that generally favor mRNAs well translated in WT cells at the expense of more poorly translated mRNAs. This competition can be attributed to increased mRNA abundance, resulting from impaired decapping/decay, coupled with reduced ribosome production. Superimposed on this general reprogramming is a Dhh1-dependent translational repression of certain poorly translated mRNAs by Dcp2. Finally, we provide evidence that Dcp2 helps to repress the abundance or translation of many mRNAs encoding proteins whose functions are dispensable during growth on glucose-replete rich medium, involved in catabolism of non-preferred carbon or nitrogen sources, mitochondrial respiration, or cell filamentation and invasive growth. These findings support the emerging model that regulators of mRNA turnover add a layer of post-transcriptional control to well-established transcriptional repression mechanisms that control various responses to nutrient limitation.
Results
Dcp2 controls mRNA abundance via both Dhh1-dependent and -independent pathways
To determine the role of Dcp2 and Dhh1 in regulating mRNA abundance and translation in nutrient-replete cells, we interrogated our previous ribosome profiling and RNA-Seq datasets obtained from isogenic WT, dcp2Delta, dhh1Delta and dcp2Deltadhh1Delta strains cultured in nutrient-rich YPD medium at 30degreesC. RNA-Seq analysis identified numerous mRNAs differentially expressed in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells, including 1376 up-regulated mRNAs (Figure 1A, blue) exhibiting a median increase of 1.96-fold (Figure 1B, mRNA_up_dcp2Delta), and 1281 down-regulated transcripts (Figure 1A, red) showing a median decrease of 0.57-fold in mRNA abundance conferred by dcp2Delta (Figure 1B, mRNA_dn_dcp2Delta). (Note in Figure 1B that the median change for all mRNAs is unity (log2 = 0) owing to normalization of RNA reads for library depth for both mutant and WT strains. In this and all subsequent box-plots, if the notches in two boxes do not overlap, their median values differ with 95% confidence.) We performed quantitative Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis of selected up- or down-regulated transcripts in total mRNA from dcp2Delta and WT cells, normalizing their abundance to a luciferase mRNA spiked into all samples, and found a strong positive correlation between the mRNA changes identified in RNA-Seq vs. qRT-PCR (Spearman's correlation coefficient rho = 0.86) (Figure 1C and Figure 1--figure supplement 1A).
Supporting information that Dcp2 regulates mRNA abundance in a manner dependent or independent of Dhh1.
(A) log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance conferred by dcp2increment vs. WT for 11 different genes determined by RNA-Seq (blue) or qRT-PCR (orange). Expression of each transcript measured by qRT-PCR was normalized to a luciferase RNA spike-in added to the total RNA. The results represent average values with standard deviations (SD) derived from at least three independent RNA preparations. (B) Notched box-plot as in Figure 1B showing log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance in dhh1increment vs. WT for all mRNA_up_dcp2increment transcripts or for the Dhh1-dependent or -independent subsets of these mRNAs calculated from data obtained here (this study), in (Jung.), (Radha.), or (He). The numbers of mRNAs for which data were obtained in each study are indicated at the bottom.
Reproducibility between biological replicates of ribosome footprint profiling and RNA-Seq analyses for WT, dcp2increment, and dcp2-EE strains.
Scatterplots of RPKM-normalized RNA-Seq (A-C) and Ribo-Seq (D-F) read densities for all expressed mRNAs for biological replicates of the WT (A, D), dcp2increment (B, E), and dcp2-EE (C, F) strains. Spearman's correlation coefficients (rho) for the plotted genes are indicated in each plot. (G) No significant changes in mRNA abundance between dcp2increment and dcp2-EE mutants. Scatterplot of normalized mRNA densities as in Figure 1A for dcp2increment vs. dcp2-E149Q,E153Q (dcp2-EE) cells, showing a Spearman correlation coefficient of 0.99.
Dhh1-dependent and -independent regulation of mRNA abundance by decapping factor Dcp2.
(A) Scatterplot of normalized mRNA densities in RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase of transcript, per Million mapped reads) for 5486 genes in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells determined by RNA-Seq. Genes showing significant changes in mRNA abundance of >1.4-fold in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells at false discovery rate (FDR) <0.1 as determined by DESeq2 analysis are shown as blue or red dots. (B) Notched box-plot of the log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance (from RNA-Seq) in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells for all mRNAs (n = 5486, median FC = 1) or subsets of transcripts either increased (n = 1376, median FC = 1.96) or decreased (n = 1281, median FC = 0.57). Median values for each group are indicated at the top, and the numbers of mRNAs for which data were obtained for each group is indicated at the bottom. A few outliers (n = 34 for mRNA_up and n = 44 for mRNA_dn groups) were omitted to expand the y-axis scale. (C) Scatterplot showing correlation between the log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance determined by RNA-Seq vs. qRT-PCR for 11 different genes in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells, with the Spearman correlation coefficient (rho) indicated. (D) Evidence that mRNA changes conferred by dcp2Delta result from loss of Dcp2 catalytic activity. A Volcano plot showing log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance (from RNA-Seq) in dcp2Delta vs. dcp2-E149Q,E153Q (dcp2-EE) (x-axis) vs. -log10 p values for the mRNA changes (y-axis) cells for all mRNAs (n = 5291). (E) Hierarchical clustering analysis of the log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance conferred by dhh1Delta, dcp2Delta, or dhh1Deltadcp2Delta vs. WT for 1336 of the mRNA_up_dcp2increment transcripts that are increased in abundance in dcp2increment vs. WT cells. Transcripts annotated on the right with green or red bars require Dhh1 or are independent of Dhh1, respectively, for their repression by Dcp2 in WT cells. The color scale indicating log2incrementmRNA values ranges from 4 (strong derepression, dark blue) to -4 (strong repression, dark red). A few outlier mRNAs (n = 40) with log2incrementmRNA values of >4.0 or 4 or +4 or 1.4-fold absolute changes in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (FDR <0.01), dubbed mRNA_up_dcp2Delta_A and mRNA_dn_dcp2Delta_A, respectively (Figure 3F, cols. 3 and 5). (The ERCC spike-in shrank the group of down-regulated mRNAs while expanding the group of up-regulated mRNAs because many mRNAs that show reduced relative abundance compared to the average gene exhibit increased absolute abundance after spike-in normalization.) Interestingly, dcp2increment confers a 1.3-fold reduced median Rpb1 occupancy for all expressed genes, indicating a global reduction in transcription rate (Figure 3F, col. 2). This is consistent with previous results indicating that decreased mRNA turnover in mutants lacking mRNA degradation enzymes is buffered by decreased rates of transcription. Importantly, the increased mRNA_up_dcp2Delta_A transcripts show reduced absolute Rpb1 occupancies in dcp2increment vs. WT cells (Figure 3F, cols. 3-4), which applies broadly to individual transcripts within the mRNA_up_dcp2Delta_A group (Figure 3G) and is exemplified by ATG8, FLO5, and CAT8 (Figure 3--figure supplement 4B). Supporting this, the mRNA_up_dcp2Delta group is 9.4-fold depleted for a group of 930 transcripts showing similar changes in Rpb1 occupancies and mRNA levels conferred by dcp2increment (Figure 3--figure supplement 4C). These results confirm our conclusion that most mRNAs are increased in abundance by dcp2increment owing primarily to decreased mRNA turnover vs. increased transcription.
A departure from this last generalization occurred for a subset of the iESR genes known to be activated by transcription factors Msn2/Msn4, which exhibit increased median Rpb1 occupancies in dcp2increment vs. WT cells, whereas the remaining iESR genes show decreased Rpb1 levels (Figure 3--figure supplement 4D cols. 3-4). A representative Msn2-activated iESR gene, TPS2, displays elevated Rpb1 occupancy across the CDS that parallels the increased mRNA abundance in dcp2increment vs. WT cells (Figure 3--figure supplement 4E). Thus, it appears that activation of certain iESR genes by Msn2/Msn4 partially overrides the effect of transcriptional buffering to yield a net increase in transcription in dcp2increment cells. The mRNA_dn_dcp2Delta_A group shows a lower median Rpb1 occupancy that is similar in magnitude to its decreased median mRNA abundance (0.68- vs. 0.61-fold, Figure 3F, cols. 5-6), suggesting that decreased transcription contributes to the decreased abundance of these transcripts down-regulated by dcp2increment.
Dcp2 modulates the TEs of many mRNAs
Because the possible role of Dcp2 in translational control was largely unexplored, we determined the changes in translation for all mRNAs conferred by dcp2Delta using our previous ribosome profiling analysis (Ribo-Seq) of the same WT and dcp2Delta strains subjected to RNA-Seq. Ribo-Seq entails deep sequencing of mRNA fragments protected from RNase cleavage by translating 80S ribosomes (RPFs), which when normalized to total mRNA levels, yields the relative ribosome density on each mRNA, a measure of relative TE. Interestingly, DESeq2 analysis revealed that Dcp2 differentially controls the TEs of hundreds of mRNAs (Figure 4A), with 541 mRNAs showing higher TEs and a similar number (n = 659) displaying reduced TEs in dcp2Delta cells (TE_dn_dcp2Delta) (Figure 4A, B). These results suggest that Dcp2 broadly controls gene expression directly or indirectly at the translational level in addition to regulating mRNA stability.
Marked correlation between RPF changes (from ribosome profiling) and protein abundance changes (from TMT-MS/MS) conferred by dcp2Delta.
(A, B) Scatterplot displaying normalized protein abundances determined by TMT-MS/MS for biological replicates, with Spearman's correlation coefficients indicated in each plot. (C) Box-plots showing the distribution of normalized peptide abundances for three biological replicates each for dcp2increment and WT strains. (D) Density-scatterplot of log2 fold-changes of RPFs vs. protein abundance for all genes detected in both ribosome profiling and TMT-MS/MS experiments, respectively. Red and blue color represents higher and lower density of points, respectively, and the linear regression line is in black. Spearman's correlation coefficient (rho) is displayed in each plot.
Dcp2 translationally repressed transcripts have properties associated with well-translated mRNAs.
Notched box-plots of CDS lengths (A), mRNA half-lives (B), mRNA abundances (C) for all mRNAs and the two sets of mRNAs translationally repressed or stimulated by Dcp2. (D) IGV depiction of a representative gene exhibiting increased TE in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells, presented as in Figure 4G.
Dcp2 regulates the TEs of hundreds of transcripts.
(A) Scatterplot as in Figure 1A except displaying significant log2 fold-changes in TE in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells, determined by ribosome profiling. (B) Notched box-plot of log2 fold-changes in TE (from ribosome profiling) in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells for all mRNAs (with median FC of 1.0) and for the two sets of TE_up_dcp2Delta or TE_dn_dcp2Delta transcripts showing translational repression or stimulation, respectively, by Dcp2. (C) Notched box-plot of log2 fold-changes in protein abundance determined by TMT-MS/MS in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells for all mRNAs or for the four indicated groups showing Dcp2-mediated repression or stimulation of mRNA abundance or TE. (D) Changes in Nano-luciferase activity in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells expressed from the indicated 13 nLUC reporters. Average values (+/- standard error of the mean [SEM]) from at least three biological replicates are shown. Results of t-tests are indicated as: ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01. Notched box-plot of log2TE in WT (E) and species-specific tRNA adaptation index (stAI) values (F) for all mRNAs or for the two groups showing repression or stimulation of translation by Dcp2. (G) Representative gene exhibiting increased TE in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells. Integrated Genomics Viewer (IGV, Broad Institute) display of mRNA and RPF reads across the YLR361C-A gene from two biological replicates each for WT, and dcp2Delta strains, shown in units of RPKM (reads per 1000 million mapped reads). Position of the CDS (blue) is at the bottom with the scale in bp; scales of RPKM for each track are on the left, and calculated DeltamRNA, DeltaRPF and DeltaTE values between each mutant and WT are on the right. (F) Notched box-plots of log2 fold-changes in TE in dcp2Delta vs. WT across ten deciles of transcripts binned according to TE in WT cells, progressing left to right from highest to lowest TEs.
To evaluate whether the changes in TE are generally associated with changes in the synthesis and abundance of the encoded proteins, we measured the changes in steady-state levels of individual proteins by Tandem Mass Tag Mass spectroscopy (TMT-MS/MS) of total proteins extracted from the dcp2Delta and WT strains. All peptides in the mutant and WT extracts were covalently labeled with different isobaric tags, which have the same mass but yield distinguishable reporter ions in the tandem MS mode. Analyzing a mixture of differentially labeled mutant and WT samples yields the ratios of peptide abundance in the two strains. We determined changes in abundance for ~4600 different proteins, with highly reproducible results for three biological replicates of each strain (Figure 4--figure supplement 1A-C). Importantly, a positive correlation exists between the relative changes in protein abundance from TMT-MS/MS and changes in RPFs from Ribo-Seq in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (rho = 0.6) (Figure 4--figure supplement 1D). Furthermore, the groups of mRNAs defined above showing significant changes in mRNA abundance or TEs conferred by dcp2Delta displayed changes in protein levels in the same directions (Figure 4C). Considering that protein abundance is controlled by rates of degradation in addition to rates of synthesis, the substantial correspondence between Ribo-Seq and TMT/MS-MS data indicates that the changes in RPFs generally signify corresponding changes in translation rates between dcp2Delta and WT cells. To provide additional support for this last conclusion, we analyzed the expression of Nano-luciferase (nLUC) reporters constructed for particular genes by inserting nLUC CDSs immediately preceding the stop codon of each gene, preserving the native 5'UTR and 3'UTR sequences. We observed increased luciferase expression in cell extracts of dcp2Delta vs. WT transformants harboring reporter plasmids for 13 different genes that showed increased RPFs in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (Figure 4D).
The mRNAs displaying increased TEs in dcp2Delta cells tend to have shorter CDS lengths, longer half-lives, and greater mRNA abundance compared to all mRNAs (Figure 4--figure supplement 2A-C). These features are associated with efficiently translated mRNAs and, indeed, the TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs have greater than average TEs in WT cells (Figure 4E) and are enriched for optimal codons (Figure 4F). The TE_dn_dcp2Delta mRNAs have properties opposite of those exhibited by the TE_up_dcp2Delta group, including longer CDS, shorter half-lives and lower transcript abundance compared to all mRNAs (Figure 4--figure supplement 2A-C), and lower than average TE in WT (Figure 4E) and frequency of non-optimal codons (Figure 4F). Extending this analysis to include all expressed mRNAs, sorted into 10 bins on the basis of their TEs in WT cells, revealed a direct correlation between TE changes conferred by dcp2Delta and TE in WT (Figure 4H), supporting the notion that Dcp2 translationally repressed mRNAs tend to be well translated, whereas Dcp2 translationally activated transcripts are generally poorly translated, in WT cells.
Dcp2 translationally repressed transcripts generally do not accumulate as decapped low-TE species in WT cells
The mRNAs encoded by YLR361C-A and YLR297A are representative transcripts exhibiting TE increases conferred by dcp2Delta of 2.0- and 2.7-fold, respectively, but displaying no significant change or a considerably smaller increase in mRNA abundance in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (Figure 4G; Figure 4--figure supplement 2D). This suggests that Dcp2 represses their translation without preferentially targeting these mRNAs for degradation. In fact, dcp2Delta generally confers the opposite effects on mRNA abundance and TE for the cohort of mRNAs it regulates translationally, as the TE_up_dcp2Delta group shows a decreased median mRNA level, while the TE_dn_dcp2Delta group of mRNAs shows an increased median mRNA level in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (Figure 5A).
Supporting evidence that dcp2Delta evokes translational reprogramming by increasing competition for limiting preinitiation complexes (PICs).
(A) Notched box-plot of log2 fold-changes in TE conferred by dcp2increment, SM treatment of WT cells, or the tma64Delta/tma20Delta double mutation, all determined by ribosome profiling, for the two groups of mRNAs that are translationally repressed (cols. 1-3) or translationally stimulated (cols. 4-6) by Dcp2. (B) Hierarchical clustering analysis of log2 fold-changes in TE conferred by dcp2increment (col. 1), SM treatment of WT cells (col. 2), or the tma64Delta/tma20Delta double mutation (col. 3) for the 1200 mRNAs belonging to the same two groups analyzed in (B) for which data were available in all three analyses (excluding a few outliers with log2incrementTE values >+4 or 1.4 at FDR <0.1, such that 41 mRNAs (blue dots) and 30 mRNAs (red dots) display significant TE increases or decreases, respectively. (E) Notched box-plot showing log2 fold-changes in mRNA, TE, or RPFs (Ribo) in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells for all RPGs. In accordance with the PIC competition model, the efficiently translated RPG mRNAs show increased TEs in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells despite strong reductions in abundance, (attributable to the rESR), for a net decrease in ribosome occupancies (RPFs/Ribo levels).
Evidence that the majority of TE changes conferred by dcp2Delta result from increased competition for limiting PICs owing to diminished ribosome production and elevated mRNA levels.
(A) Notched box-plot showing log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance in dcp2Delta relative to WT cells for all mRNAs, or the mRNAs translationally repressed (blue) or stimulated (red) by Dcp2 in WT cells. (B) Hypothetical schematic model to explain TE increases conferred by dcp2Delta resulting from the persistence of translationally inert, decapped intermediates in WT cells. In WT (upper), the TE_up_dcp2Delta group of mRNAs is preferentially targeted by Dcp2 for decapping and these uncapped species cannot bind eIF4F and thus exhibit low TEs. In dcp2increment cells (lower), decapping is eliminated and the low-TE, decapped fraction no longer exists, which increases the overall TE of the transcript pool. Notched box-plots of ratios of capped mRNA TPMs to total mRNA TPMs (C/T) (C) and C/T ratios in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (D) for all mRNAs and the group translationally repressed by Dcp2. (E) Schematic of the preinitiation complex (PIC) competition model proposed to explain the broad reprogramming of TEs conferred by dcp2Delta. A combination of diminished ribosome production resulting from down-regulation of rESR transcripts and elevated bulk capped mRNAs resulting from loss of decapping-mediated mRNA turnover evokes increased competition among all mRNAs for limiting PICs, producing relatively greater translation of efficiently translated mRNAs in WT cells (strong mRNAs) at the expense of poorly translated mRNAs in WT (weak mRNAs). (F) Notched box-plot showing log2 fold-changes in protein abundance determined by TMT-MS/MS in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells for all mRNAs or those from 110 genes encoding ribosomal proteins (RPGs). (G) Quantification of total 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells. Representative A260 profiles of equal proportions of cell extracts obtained from WT (blue) and dcp2Delta (orange) cultures are shown. The inset summarizes the combined areas under the 40S and 60S peaks normalized to the OD600 of the cell cultures calculated from three biological replicates of dcp2increment and WT cells, setting the mean WT value to unity. An unpaired Student's t-test indicates a highly significant difference in the means calculated from the biological replicates of the two different strains (***p < 0.001).
We wondered whether the mRNAs translationally repressed by Dcp2 might be preferentially decapped but not rapidly degraded by Xrn1, such that their relative mRNA abundance is not down-regulated by Dcp2. Such decapped mRNAs would have a low TE owing to the inability to bind eIF4F and to be activated for translation initiation, and their TEs would increase in dcp2Delta cells because they would remain capped and capable of binding eIF4F (see model in Figure 5B). This model predicts that the TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs should exhibit lower than average relative proportions of capped mRNAs (C/T ratios) in WT cells, and a greater than average increase in C/T ratios conferred by dcp2Delta owing to loss of decapping (Figure 5B). Instead, the TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs have somewhat higher than average C/T ratios in WT cells (Figure 5C), and show an increase in C/T ratios in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells indistinguishable from that seen for all mRNAs (Figure 5D), inconsistent with the decapping model for translational repression by Dcp2.
Evidence that competition for limiting ribosomes reprograms translation in dcp2Delta cells
We considered an alternative possibility that dcp2Delta confers TE changes as an indirect consequence of elevated mRNA levels resulting from loss of the major pathway for mRNA degradation. This idea was prompted by the above finding that mRNAs showing TE increases in dcp2Delta cells tend to be efficiently translated in WT cells, whereas mRNAs poorly translated in WT tend to show TE reductions in the mutant (Figure 4E, H). Previously, we observed this pattern of translational reprogramming in yeast cells impaired in different ways for assembly of 43S PICs, including (1) increased phosphorylation of eIF2alpha in WT cells induced by isoleucine/valine starvation using the drug sulfometuron methyl (SM), which decreases formation of the eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNAi ternary complex required to assemble 43S PIC; and (2) deletion of genes TMA64 and TMA20 encoding factors that recycle 40S subunits from termination complexes at stop codons to provide free 40S subunits for PIC assembly. The translational reprogramming was explained as resulting from increased competition for limiting PICs that allows 'strong' well-translated mRNAs, highly efficient in recruiting PICs, to outcompete 'weak' poorly translated mRNAs that recruit PICs less efficiently. Supporting that a similar competition exists among mRNAs translationally altered by dcp2Delta, we found that the TE_up_dcp2Delta group of mRNAs shows increased median TE in response to both SM treatment of WT cells and deletion of TMA64/TMA20 (tmaDeltaDelta), whereas the TE_dn_dcp2Delta mRNAs exhibit the opposite changes in median TE in response to these conditions (Figure 5--figure supplement 1A). Hierarchical clustering analysis reveals that the majority of mRNAs showing significant TE changes in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells exhibit changes in the same direction in response to the tmaDeltaDelta mutations or SM treatment (Figure 5--figure supplement 1B). There are numerous exceptions to this trend, however, suggesting that perturbations specific to each condition can differentially affect the translation of particular mRNAs and alter their responses to increased competition for limiting PICs.
We considered that increased competition among mRNAs for limiting PICs might exist in dcp2Delta cells for two main reasons: (1) impairing decapping-mediated mRNA decay will stabilize most transcripts and elevate bulk cellular mRNA abundance; and (2) reduced ribosome content arising from the repression of rESR mRNAs, which encode ribosomal proteins and ribosome biogenesis factors. Indeed, a recent study demonstrated reduced ribosome content in mutant cells undergoing the ESR. We hypothesized that the combination of increased mRNA abundance and reduced ribosomal content will increase competition among mRNAs for limiting PICs and confer the observed translational reprogramming that favors strong over weak mRNAs in dcp2Delta cells (Figure 5E).
As mentioned above, our spike-in normalized RNA-Seq data revealed a median increase of 24% in bulk mRNA in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (Figure 3F), indicating elevated mRNA abundance in cells lacking Dcp2. Considering that all mRNAs should be capped in dcp2Delta cells, whereas a fraction of mRNAs are uncapped in WT, the increase in capped mRNA abundance conferred by dcp2Delta should be even greater than 24%. Evidence that dcp2Delta reduces ribosome content came from our findings that the group of 139 ribosomal proteins exhibits ~twofold lower RPFs (Figure 5--figure supplement 1C) and a ~25% reduction in median abundance determined by TMT/MS (Figure 5F) in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells. We then measured the abundance of assembled ribosomal subunits by resolving whole cell extracts of mutant and WT cells by sedimentation through sucrose density gradients, using an extraction buffer lacking Mg+2 to dissociate 80S ribosomes into free 40S and 60S subunits. Normalizing the A260 absorbance of ribosomal subunits to the number of OD600 units (cellular volume) of extracted cells, revealed ~30% lower levels of 40S and 60S subunits in dcp2Delta vs. WT cells (Figure 5G). The significant reduction in ribosome levels coupled with the increased capped mRNA content in dcp2Delta cells should increase competition among mRNAs for limiting PICs to favor well-translated mRNAs at the expense of poorly translated ones, as we observed (Figure 4H).
Dhh1 is required for translational repression of a subset of transcripts by Dcp2
To examine whether Dhh1 contributes to this indirect mechanism of translational reprogramming, we asked whether mRNAs translationally dysregulated by dcp2Delta are dependent on Dhh1 for their TE changes. Cluster analysis revealed that most transcripts showing increased TEs in the dcp2Delta single mutant show similar TE increases in the dhh1Deltadcp2Delta double mutant but exhibit little increase, or even decreases, in TE in the dhh1Delta single mutant vs. WT (Figure 6A, orange bars), indicating that they are controlled by Dcp2 independently of Dhh1. Indeed, this subset of Dcp2-translationally repressed mRNAs shows nearly identical increases in median TE in the dhh1Deltadcp2Delta double and dcp2Delta single mutant of ~1.6-fold, but only a slight increase of ~1.1-fold in the dhh1Delta single mutant (Figure 6B, cols. 4-6). Interestingly, the remaining one-fourth of TE_up_dcp2Delta transcripts exhibits similar TE increases in all three deletion mutants (Figure 6A, green bars), with nearly identical ~2.3-fold increases in median TE relative to WT (Figure 6B, cols. 1-3), indicating dependence on Dhh1 for translational repression by Dcp2. The Dhh1-dependent subset shows considerably greater translational repression by Dcp2 compared to the Dhh1-independent group (Figure 6B, compare cols. 1 and 4).
Additional evidence that mRNAs exhibiting Dhh1-dependent translational repression by Dcp2 are preferentially targeted for decapping by Dcp2 and Dhh1.
Notched box-plot of species-specific tRNA adaptation index (stAI) values (A), log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance in dcp2Delta vs. WT (B), and log2 fold-changes in mRNA abundance in dhh1Delta vs. WT (C) for all mRNAs, all TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs, or the Dhh1-dependent or -independent subsets of the TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs.
mRNAs exhibiting Dhh1-dependent translational repression by Dcp2 are poorly translated mRNAs preferentially targeted for decapping by Dcp2 and Dhh1.
(A) Hierarchical clustering analysis of log2 fold-changes in TE conferred by the mutations listed across the top vs. WT for the TE_up_dcp2Delta mRNAs (excluding a few outliers [n = 7] with log2incrementTE values >+4 or 1.5-fold increases in RPF and mRNA abundance: IMG2, SDH5, MPM1, CIR1, and MSC6. Thus, it seems likely that Puf3 could be involved in Dcp2-mediated mRNA degradation for only these five Puf3 'cis' targets. While Puf3 might play a role in repressing the translation of the other Puf3 'cis' targets whose TE is increased by dcp2Delta, these mRNAs are well translated in WT cells and may conform to the ribosome competition mechanism instead. It seems plausible that other RNA-binding proteins besides Puf3 mediate the repression of mRNA abundance by Dcp2 for many of the ~1330 other transcripts in the mRNA_up_dcp2Delta group or members of the 100 mRNAs translationally repressed by Dcp2 in a manner requiring Dhh1, which were identified in our study.
Materials and methods
Strains, plasmids, and culture conditions
Yeast strains, plasmids, and primers used in the study are listed in Supplementary file 1a-1c, respectively. Yeast strain VAK022 harboring dcp2-E149Q,E153Q (dcp2-EE) was constructed in two steps. First, mutations G to C at positions 445 and 457 were introduced into DCP2 in plasmid pQZ145 using primers AKV005/AKV006 and the Quick-change Site-Directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent, 200519), generating plasmid pAV008 containing dcp2-E149Q,E153Q. Next, a 3.3-kb fragment containing dcp2-E149Q,E153Q with 400-bp upstream of the start codon (containing a Pf1N1 restriction site) was PCR amplified using primers AKV088/AKV090, and the resultant fragment was inserted between the BamHI and SacI sites of integrative vector YIplac211 to produce plasmid pAKV013. The DNA fragment generated by digestion of pAKV013 with Pf1N1 was used to transform WT strain W303 to Ura+. Finally, strain VAK022 was obtained from one such Ura+ transformant by selecting for loss of the URA3 marker via homologous recombination by counter-selection on medium containing 5-fluoro-orotic acid. The replacement of DCP2 with dcp2-E149Q, E153Q was verified by sequencing the PCR product obtained from chromosomal DNA amplified with the primer pairs AKV010/AKV015.
The 13 reporter plasmids containing nLUC reporters listed in Supplementary file 1d were constructed to fuse the nanoLUC CDSs (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae, Supplementary file 1e), preceded by the GGG glycine codon, to the final codon of the complete CDS of each gene, preserving the native stop codon, 3'UTR sequences, and segment of 3'-noncoding sequences of the gene, as well as a segment of 5'-noncoding sequences including the native promoter and 5'UTR sequences, of the gene of interest (fragment lengths of 5' and 3' region listed in Supplementary file 1d), by the following three-step procedure. First, DNA fragments were synthesized containing a SmaI site, the nLUC CDS (including the ATG and stop codon), the native stop codon and 3' noncoding sequences for each gene of interest, and an EcoRI site, and inserted between the SmaI and EcoRI sites of pRS316 to produce an intermediate plasmid for each gene of interest. Second, PCR amplification from WT yeast genomic DNA was conducted to generate a fragment for each gene of interest containing 20 nt of pRS316 adjacent to the SmaI site, the CCC nucleotides of the SmaI site, the 5'-noncoding region, 5'UTR, and CDS of the relevant gene (excluding the stop codon), the CCC complement of the GGG glycine codon, and the first 20nt of the nLUC CDS. Third, Gibson assembly was used to insert the PCR-amplified fragments from the second step at the SmaI sites of the intermediate plasmids, using 2x ExSembly Cloning Master mix (LifeSct LLC, M0005) and following the vender's instructions except that a 15-min incubation at 25degreesC was included prior to the 37degreesC incubation to allow for optimal SmaI digestion.
Plasmid pNG158 contains the PAT1 CDS, with 500 bp upstream and 192 bp downstream, on a 3083-bp fragment amplified by PCR from yeast genomic DNA, and inserted between the SalI and XmaI sites of pRS315. The plasmids were constructed by NEBuilder HiFi DNA assembly (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Unless mentioned otherwise, strains were cultured in YPD medium to mid-exponential growth phase (OD600 ~ 0.6) before harvesting.
Ribosome profiling and parallel RNA sequencing
Ribosome profiling and RNA-Seq analysis were conducted in parallel, essentially as described previously, using isogenic strains W303 (WT), CFY1016 (dcp2Delta), and VAK023 (dcp2-EE) with two biological replicates performed for each genotype. Cells were harvested by vacuum filtration and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in a freezer mill in the presence of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 8), 140 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1% Triton X-100) supplemented with 500 mg/ml cycloheximide. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 3000 x g for 5 min at 4degreesC, and the resulting supernatant was subjected to centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 4degreesC, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80degreesC.
For preparation of libraries of RPFs, 50 A260 units of cell lysates were digested with 450 U of RNase I (Ambion, AM2294) for 1 hr at room temperature (RT, ~25degreesC) on a Thermomixer at 700 rpm, and extracts were resolved on 10-50% sucrose gradients by centrifugation for 160 min at 39,000 rpm, 4degreesC in a Beckman SW41Ti rotor. Gradients were fractionated at 0.75 ml/min with continuous monitoring of A260 values using a Biocomp Instruments Gradient Station. RNA was purified from the 80S monosome fractions using an RNA Clean and Concentrator kit (Zymo, R1018), resolved by electrophoresis on a 15% TBE-Urea gel, and 25-34 nt fragments isolated from the gel were dephosphorylated using T4 Polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs, M0201L). For each library sample, barcoded 5'-pre-adenylated linkers were added to the 3' ends of footprints using T4 Rnl2(tr) K227Q (New England Biolabs, M0351S), and excess unligated linker was removed using 10 U/microl 5' deadenylase/RecJ exonuclease (Epicentre, RJ411250), followed by pooling and purification of ligated footprints using an Oligo Clean and Concentrator column (Zymo Research, D4060). Ribosomal RNA contamination was removed by biotinylated primers, followed by reverse transcription using Protoscript II (New England Biolabs, M0368L) and circularization of cDNA using CircLigase ssDNA Ligase (Epicenter, CL4111K). Each pooled library was PCR amplified using Phusion polymerase (F-530) (New England Biolabs, M0530S). Quality of the libraries was assessed with a Bioanalyzer using the High Sensitivity DNA Kit (Agilent, 5067-4626) and quantified by Qubit. Single-end 50 bp sequencing was done on an Illumina HiSeq system at the NHLBI DNA Sequencing and Genomics Core at NIH (Bethesda, MD).
For RNA-Seq library preparation, total RNA was extracted and purified from aliquots of the same snapped-frozen cells described above using the Zymo RNA Clean and Concentrator kit. Five mg of total RNA was randomly fragmented by incubating with Ambion Fragmentation Reagent (Ambion, AM8740) at 70degreesC for 12 min. The reaction was stopped by adding Stop Solution (Ambion, AM8740) and precipitated by adding one part of isopropanol followed by precipitation with 70% ethanol. Fragment size selection, library generation, and sequencing were carried out using the same protocol described above for RPF library preparation, except that Ribo-Zero Gold rRNA Removal Kit (Illumina, MRZ11124C) was employed to remove rRNA after linker ligation.
As described earlier, Illumina sequencing reads were trimmed to remove the constant adapter sequence, mixed sample sequences were separated by the sample barcodes followed by removal of PCR duplicates using a custom Python (3.7) script. The sequences aligned to yeast noncoding RNAs were removed using bowtie and non-rRNA reads (unaligned reads) were then mapped to the S. cerevisiae genome (R64-1-1 S288C SacCer3 Genome Assembly) using TopHat. Only uniquely mapped reads from the final genomic alignment were used for subsequent analyses. Statistical analysis of changes in mRNA, RPFs, or TE values between two replicates each of any two strains being compared was conducted using DESeq2 excluding any genes with less than 10 total mRNA reads in the four samples (of two replicates each) combined. DESeq2 is well suited to identifying changes in mRNA or RPF expression, or TEs, with very low incidence of false positives using results from only two highly correlated biological replicates for each of the strains/conditions being compared. The R script employed for DESeq2 analysis of TE changes can be found on Github (https://github.com/hzhanghenry/RiboProR). Wiggle files were generated as described previously and visualized using Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV 2.4.14, http://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/). Wiggle tracks shown are normalized according to the total number of mapped reads.
Parallel CAGE and RNA sequencing
Total RNA was prepared by hot-phenol extraction from two biological replicates of each strain. RNA integrity was determined using the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano kit (5067-1511) and the concentrations were measured by Nanodrop spectroscopy. CAGE libraries were constructed and sequenced following the nAnT-iCAGE protocol by K.K. DNAFORM of Japan. Briefly, cDNAs were transcribed to the 5' ends of capped RNAs, ligated at the 5' and 3' ends with barcoded linkers, followed by second strand synthesis, and the resulting DNA libraries were sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq500 (Single-end, 75 bp reads) platform. Between 20 and 25 million mapped CAGE tags were obtained for each sample (Figure 3--figure supplement 1--source data 1).
The sequenced CAGE reads of each sample were aligned to the reference genome of S. cerevisiae S288C (Assembly version: sacCer3) using HISAT2. For read alignment, we disabled the soft clipping option in HISAT2 by using '--no-softclip' to avoid false-positive transcription start sites (TSSs). CAGE reads mapped to rRNA genes were identified using rRNAdust (http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/sstar/Protocols:rRNAdust), and were excluded from subsequent TSS analyses (Figure 3--figure supplement 1--source data 1).
TSS identification, inference of TSS clusters (TC, representing putative core promoters), and assigning TCs to their downstream genes were carried out by using TSSr. CAGE reads with a mapping quality score (MAPQ) >20 were considered uniquely mapped reads, which were used for subsequent analyses. CAGE signals of biological replicates were then merged as a single sample. The transcription abundance of each TSS was quantified as the numbers of CAGE tags/reads supporting the TSS per million mapped reads (TPM). Only TSSs with TPM >=0.1 were used to infer TCs, representing putative core promoters.
The 'peakclu' method was used to infer TCs for each sample, with the following options 'peakDistance = 50, extensionDistance = 25, localThreshold = 0.01'. A set of Consensus TCs of all samples were generated by using the 'consensusCluster' function in TSSr with an option of 'dis = 100'. Consensus TCs were then assigned to their downstream genes if they are within 1000 bp upstream and 50 bp downstream of the start codon of annotated ORFs. The TPM value of a consensus TC in a sample is the sum of TPM values of all TSSs within its range. The TPM value of a gene was calculated as the sum of all consensus TCs assigned to the gene.
RNA sequencing libraries were produced in parallel from the same RNA samples subjected to CAGE sequencing by the NHLBI DNA sequencing Core at NIH (Bethesda, MD) using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, Paired-end 50 bp reads) and sequenced using the NovaSeq6000 Illumina platform. Prior to library preparation, rRNA was depleted using the QIAGEN FastSelect yeast rRNA depletion kit. Sequencing reads were mapped to the S288C genome (R64-1-1 S288C SacCer3) using STAR aligner and PCR duplicates were removed by Samtools (Figure 3--figure supplement 1--source data 1).
Identification of differentially expressed genes in total RNA (incrementmRNA_T) or capped RNA (incrementmRNA_C) in dcp2increment vs. WT cells was conducted by DESeq2 analysis using raw read counts from the RNA-Seq or CAGE sequencing experiments conducted in parallel on the same RNA samples. To calculate C/T ratios, RNA-Seq reads assigned to each gene were normalized as TPM reads by dividing the read counts by the length of each gene in kilobases (reads per kilobase, RPK), summing all the RPK values in a sample and normalizing, to generate 'per million' scaling factors. Further, RPK values were normalized by the 'per million' scaling factor to give TPM. Because a single read/tag is generated for each transcript in CAGE, its TPM (tags per million mapped tags) is equivalent to the TPM value obtained from RNA-Seq, allowing comparisons of the two types of TPM values. The C/T ratio of each gene was calculated by dividing CAGE TPMs by RNA-Seq TPMs in each strain after first removing all genes with zero CAGE reads in either the dcp2increment or WT samples being compared. In interrogating C/T ratios for the groups of mRNAs increased or decreased by dcp2increment, the same two groups defined using the RNA-Seq data obtained in parallel with ribosome profiling were examined to allow changes in mRNA abundance, C/T ratios, ribosome occupancies, and TEs to be compared for the same two sets of mRNAs. The conclusions reached regarding changes in C/T ratios were not altered if the groups were defined using the RNA-Seq data obtained in parallel with CAGE sequencing instead.
RNA sequencing with spike-in normalization
ERCC ExFold RNA spike-In Mixes (Ambion, part no. 4456739) consisting of spike-In Mix I and spike-In Mix II were equally added to WT and dcp2Delta total RNA (2.4 microl of 1:100-fold diluted spike-In to 1.2 microg of total RNA), respectively, according to the manufacturer's instructions. STAR software was used to align mapped sequencing reads, including reads from the spike-In RNAs, to the S288C genome or ERCC RNA sequences. Reads obtained from the 23 spike-in transcripts belonging to subgroup B (present in equal concentrations in Mix I and Mix II) were used to calculate size factors for each library and reads corresponding to yeast genes were normalized by the size factors. DESeq2 was further employed to calculate the differential expression between strains by setting the size factor to unity.
ChIP-Seq and data analysis
WT and dcp2increment strains were cultured in triplicate in YPD medium to A600 of 0.6-0.8 and treated with formaldehyde as previously described. ChIP-Seq was conducted as described using monoclonal antibody against Rpb1 (8WG16, Biolegend, 664906). DNA libraries for Illumina paired-end sequencing were prepared using the DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina from New England Biolabs (E7370L). Paired-end sequencing (50 nt from each end) was conducted by the DNA Sequencing and Genomics core facility of the NHLBI, NIH. Sequence data were aligned to the SacCer3 version of the genome sequence using Bowtie2 with parameters -X 1000 -very-sensitive, to map sequences up to 1 kb with maximum accuracy. PCR duplicates from ChIP-Seq data were removed using the samtools rmdup package. Numbers of aligned paired reads from each ChIP-Seq experiment are summarized in Figure 3--source data 3. Raw genome-wide occupancy profiles for Rpb1 were computed using the coverage function in R and relative occupancies were obtained by normalizing each profile to the average occupancy obtained for the relevant chromosome (https://github.com/rchereji/bamR). To visualize specific loci, BigWig files of samples were loaded in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV).
For spike-in normalization of Rpb1 ChIP-Seq data, identical aliquots of S. pombe chromatin were added to each S. cerevisiae chromatin sample being analyzed in parallel, corresponding to 10% of the DNA in the S. cerevisiae chromatin samples, prior to immunoprecipitating with Rpb1. As described fully in Figure 3--source data 3, a normalization factor for each sample was calculated by dividing the average number of total S. pombe reads obtained across all samples by the total S. pombe reads obtained for that sample. The observed reads mapping to the S. cerevisiae genome were multiplied by the normalization factor to yield the spike-in normalized reads for that sample. Raw genome-wide occupancy profiles for Rpb1 were computed using the coverage function in R, wherein each profile was set with the same total 'OCC' to allow the comparison between WT and dcp2increment, using the custom R script (https://github.com/hzhanghenry/OccProR).
qRT-PCR analysis of mRNA abundance
Total RNA was isolated by hot-phenol extraction as previously described and the concentration was determined using the Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher). Ten microg of total RNA was treated with DNase I (Roche, 4716728001) and 40 pg of Luciferase Control RNA (Promega L4561) was added to 1 microg of DNase I-treated total RNA and subjected to cDNA synthesis using a Superscript III First-Strand synthesis kit (Invitrogen 18080051). qRT-PCR was carried out using 10-fold diluted cDNA and Brilliant II SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (Agilent, 600828) with the appropriate primer pairs (listed in Supplementary file 1c) at 200 nM. Expression of each transcript was normalized to that of the luciferase spike-in RNA from at least two biological replicates.
TMT-MS/MS analysis
Three biological replicates of WT and dcp2Delta were cultured in YPD medium and harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 3000 x g. Whole-cell extracts (WCEs) were prepared using 8 M urea in 25 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB; Thermo Scientific, 90114) by washing the pellets once with the same buffer and vortexing with glass beads in the cold room for 2 min with intermittent cooling on ice water. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 30 min and the protein quality was assessed following sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using GelCode Blue Stain (Thermo Scientific, 24592) and quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225). Sample preparation and TMT-MS/MS was performed by the NHLBI Proteomics Core at NIH (Bethesda, MD). Briefly, 100 microg of WCEs was incubated for 1 hr at 37degreesC with freshly prepared dithiothreitol (DTT, 20 mM final) to reduce disulfide bridges. Alkylation was performed at RT for 1 hr with freshly made 50 mM iodoacetamide (50 mM, final) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the reaction was quenched by adding DTT (50 mM, final). Lysates were diluted 10-fold with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 3 microg of trypsin (Promega, v5111) overnight at 37degreesC. Digests were acidified by adding formic acid (1%, final) and desalted with Waters Oasis HLB 1 cc columns. Peptides were eluted from desalted samples with 1 ml of buffer E (0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile) and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were labeled with TMT reagents for multiplexing (TMT10plex label reagent set, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, resuspended TMT reagent was added to each sample, incubated for 1 hr at RT and the reaction quenched with 8 microl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Equal amounts of each sample were combined and the pooled sample was dried in a SpeedVac. To increase the protein coverage, each set of pooled TMT samples was separated into 24 fractions using basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC). Quantification of TMT-labeled peptides was conducted on an LTQ Orbitrap Lumos-based nanoLCMS system (Thermo Scientific) with a 2-hr gradient at 120 k resolution for MS1 and 50 K for MS2 at 38% HCD energy.
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and the MS2 spectra were searched in the SwissProt Yeast database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using the SEQUEST search engine. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Percolator based on q-values at a 1% FDR (; http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/analysis/MascotPercolator/). Relative abundance of each peptide in a strain is measured by normalizing to the total abundance of that peptide coming from all the strains used in the study. We determined the protein-level fold-changes based on the median of peptide-level fold-changes from the Proteome Discoverer-produced abundances.
Measuring nLUC reporter expression
Nano-luciferase was assayed in WCEs as previously described. Briefly, WT and dcp2Delta transformants harboring the appropriate nLUC reporter plasmids (Supplementary file 1b) or empty vector pRS316 were cultured in synthetic complete medium lacking uracil (SC-Ura) to OD600 of ~1.2. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 3000 x g and resuspended in 1x phosphate-buffered saline lysis buffer containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 5056489001). WCEs were prepared by vortexing with glass beads, and clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 30 min at 4degreesC. Nano-Glo substrate (Promega, N1120) was diluted 1:50 with the supplied lysis buffer and mixed with 10 microl of WCE in a white 96-well plate. Bioluminescence was determined immediately using a Centro Microplate Luminometer (Berthold), and light units were normalized by the total protein concentrations of the corresponding WCEs determined using the Bradford reagent (BioRad, 5000006).
Polysome profiling to measure ribosome content
Three biological replicates of WT and dcp2Delta were cultured in 300 ml of YPD medium at 30degreesC to OD600 of 1.2-1.5 and quick-chilled by pouring into centrifuge tubes filled with ice. After collecting the cells by centrifugation for 10 min at 7000 x g, the cell pellets were resuspended in an equal volume of Buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 200 muM PMSF, 0.15 microM Aprotinin, 1 microM Leupeptin, 0.1 microM Pepstatin A) and WCEs were prepared by vortexing with glass beads in the cold room, followed by two cycles of centrifugation for 10 min at 3000 rpm and 15,000 rpm at 4degreesC, respectively. (Cycloheximide and MgCl2 were omitted from the lysis buffer in order to separate 80S ribosomes into 40S and 60S subunits.) Equal volumes of cleared lysate from WT and dcp2Delta cultures were resolved on 5-47% (wt/wt) sucrose gradients by centrifugation at 39,000 rpm for 3 hr at 4degreesC in a Beckman SW41Ti rotor. Gradient fractions were scanned at 260 nm using a gradient fractionator (Bio-comp Instruments, Triax), and the area under the 40S and 60S peaks were quantified using ImageJ software. To estimate the ribosomal content per cell volume, the combined areas under the 40S and 60S peaks were normalized by the OD600 values of the starting cultures.
Western blot analysis
For western analysis of respiratory proteins, WCEs were prepared by trichloroacetic acid extraction as previously described and immunoblot analysis was conducted as described previously. After electroblotting to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, IPVH00010), membranes were probed with antibodies against Aco1, Atp20, Cox14, Pet10 (a kind gift from Dr. Nikolaus Pfanner), Idh1 (Abnova, PAB19472), and GAPDH (Proteintech, 60004). Secondary antibodies employed were HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (GE, NA9340V), anti-mouse IgG (GE, NA931V), and anti-goat IgG (Abnova, PAB29101). Detection was performed using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, Cytiva, RPN2109) and the Azure 200 gel imaging biosystem.
Measuring mitochondrial membrane potential
Precultures were grown in SC-Ura (to select for the URA3 plasmids) to OD600 of ~3.0 and used to inoculate YPD medium at OD600 of 0.2. Cells were grown to OD600 of ~0.6-0.8 and incubated with 500 nM TMRM for 1 hr. Cells were washed once with distilled H2O and fluorescence was measured using flow cytometry (BD LSR II) at the Microscopy, Imaging & Cytometry Resources (MICR) Core at Wayne State University. Dye fluorescence is proportional to mitochondrial membrane potential. Median fluorescence intensity of single cells was analyzed with the FlowJo software, and normalized to the OD600 of the cultures. Data presented are in arbitrary fluorescence units normalized to OD600 of the cultures. In control samples, 50 microM FCCP was added to cells to dissipate the membrane potential and provide a measure of non-specific background fluorescence.
Plate-washing assay of invasive cell growth
The plate-washing assay was performed as described. Briefly, plates were incubated for 4 days at 30degreesC and photographed before washing using the ChemiDoc XRS + molecular imager (Bio-Rad) under the blot/chemicoloric setting with no filter. Small amounts of cells were excised from colonies using a toothpick and resuspended in water for microscopic examination. Plates were also photographed after being washed in a stream of water. Invasive growth was measured by the Image Lab 6.0.1 program (Bio-Rad) using the round volume tool. Invasive growth levels were normalized for colony size and reported as the average of three independent replicates. Error represents the SD. Significance was determined by Student's t-test, p-value <0.05.
Data visualization and statistical analysis
Notched box-plots were constructed using a web-based tool at http://shiny.chemgrid.org/boxplotr/. In all such plots, the upper and lower boxes contain the second and third quartiles and the band gives the median. If the notches in two plots do not overlap, there is roughly 95% confidence that their medians are different. For some plots, the significance of differences in medians was assessed independently using the Mann-Whitney U test computed using the R Stats package in R. Scatterplots displaying correlations between sequencing read counts from biological replicates were created using the scatterplot function in Microsoft Excel. Spearman's correlation analysis and the Student's t-test were conducted using Microsoft Excel. Venn diagrams were generated using the web-based tool (https://www.biovenn.nl/) and the significance of gene set overlaps in Venn diagrams was evaluated with the hypergeometric distribution using the web-based tool (https://systems.crump.ucla.edu/hypergeometric/index.php). Hierarchical clustering analysis of mRNA or TE changes in mutant vs. WT strains was conducted with the R heatmap.2 function from the R 'gplots' library, using the default hclust hierarchical clustering algorithm. Volcano plots were created using the web-based tool (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR/). GO analysis was conducted using the web-based tool at http://funspec.med.utoronto.ca/.
Data resources for mRNA features
Analyses of mRNA features for different gene sets were conducted using the following published compilations: 5'UTR and CDS lengths, WT mRNA steady-state amounts (in molecules per dry cellular weight - pgDW), WT mRNA half-lives, and stAI values.
Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
to Miriam L Greenberg, Chisom Onu.
to Matthew D Vandermeulen, Paul J Cullen.
to Xiao Niu, Zhenguo Lin.
Additional information
Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
Reviewing editor, eLife.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Formal analysis, Investigation.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing - original draft.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing - original draft.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft.
Methodology.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing - original draft, Project administration.
Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Project administration.
Conceptualization, Software, Formal analysis, Supervision, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing.
Additional files
Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession codes GSE220578 and GSE216831. All other data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files; Source Data files have been provided for all figures.
The following datasets were generated:
Vijjamarri
AK
Niu
X
Vandermeulen
MD
Onu
C
Zhang
F
Qiu
H
Gupta
N
Gaikwad
S
Greenberg
ML
Cullen
PJ
Lin
Z
Hinnebusch
AG
2023
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE220578
Vijjamarri
AK
Niu
X
Vandermeulen
MD
Onu
C
Zhang
F
Qiu
H
Gupta
N
Gaikwad
S
Greenberg
ML
Cullen
PJ
Lin
Z
Hinnebusch
AG
2023
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE216831
The following previously published datasets were used:
Jungfleisch
J
Nedialkova
DD
Dotu
I
Sloan
KE
2016
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE87892
Radhakrishnan
A
Chen
YH
Martin
S
Alhusaini
N
2016
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE81269
He
F
Celik
A
Wu
C
Jacobson
A
2017
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE107841
Celik
A
Baker
R
He
F
Jacobson
A
2016
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE86428
Zeidan
Q
He
F
Zhang
F
Zhang
H
2019
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GSE114892
References
