Identification of tissue damage, extracellular matrix remodeling and bacterial challenge as common mechanisms associated with high-risk cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas. 
In this study we used a genetic extracellular matrix (ECM) disease to identify mechanisms associated with aggressive behavior of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). cSCC is one of the most common malignancies and usually has a good prognosis. However, some cSCCs recur or metastasize and cause significant morbidity and mortality. Known factors that are associated with aggressiveness of cSCCs include tumor grading, size, localization and microinvasive behavior. To investigate molecular mechanisms that influence biologic behavior we used global proteomic and histologic analyses of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue of primary human cSCCs. We compared three groups: non-recurring, non-metastasizing low-risk sporadic cSCCs; metastasizing sporadic cSCCs; and cSCCs from patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB). RDEB is a genetic skin blistering and ECM disease caused by collagen VII deficiency. Patients commonly suffer from high-risk early onset cSCCs that frequently metastasize. The results indicate that different processes are associated with formation of RDEB cSCCs compared to sporadic cSCCs. Sporadic cSCCs show signs of UV damage, whereas RDEB cSCCs have higher mutational rates and display tissue damage, inflammation and subsequent remodeling of the dermal ECM as tumor initiating factors. Interestingly the two high-risk groups - high-risk metastasizing sporadic cSCCs and RDEB cSCCs - are both associated with tissue damage and ECM remodeling in gene-ontology enrichment and Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins analyses. In situ histologic analyses validate these results. The high-risk cSCCs also show signatures of enhanced bacterial challenge. Histologic analyses confirm correlation of bacterial colonization with worse prognosis. Collectively, this unbiased study - performed directly on human patient material - reveals that common microenvironmental alterations linked to ECM remodeling and increased bacterial challenges are denominators of high-risk cSCCs. The proteins identified here could serve as potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets in high-risk cSCCs. 
