Quantitative Proteomics of Strong and Weak Biofilm Formers of Enterococcus faecalis Reveals Novel Regulators of Biofilm Formation. 
Enterococcus faecalis is a bacterial pathogen associated with both endodontic and systemic infections. The biofilm formation ability of E. faecalis plays a key role in its virulence and drug resistance attributes. The formation of E. faecalis biofilms on implanted medical devices often results in treatment failure. In the present study, we report protein markers associated with the biofilm formation ability of E. faecalis using iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics approach. In order to elucidate the biofilm-associated protein markers, we investigated the proteome of strong and weak biofilm-forming E. faecalis clinical isolates in comparison with standard American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) control strains. Comparison of E. faecalis strong and weak biofilm-forming clinical isolates with ATCC control strains showed that proteins associated with shikimate kinase pathway and sulfate transport were up-regulated in the strong biofilm former, while proteins associated with secondary metabolites, cofactor biosynthesis, and tetrahydrofolate biosynthesis were down-regulated. In the weak biofilm former, proteins associated with nucleoside and nucleotide biosynthesis were up-regulated, whereas proteins associated with sulfate and sugar transport were down-regulated. Further pathway and gene ontology analyses revealed that the major differences in biofilm formation arise from differences in metabolic activity levels of the strong and weak biofilm formers, with higher levels of metabolic activity observed in the weak biofilm former. The differences in metabolic activity could therefore be a major determinant of the biofilm ability of E. faecalis The new markers identified from this study can be further characterized in order to understand their exact role in E. faecalis biofilm formation ability. This, in turn, can lead to numerous therapeutic benefits in the treatment of this oral and systemic pathogen. The data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006542. 
