Building ProteomeTools based on a complete synthetic human proteome. 
We describe ProteomeTools, a project building molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical research. Here we report the generation and multimodal liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of >330,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing essentially all canonical human gene products, and we exemplify the utility of these data in several applications. The resource (available at http://www.proteometools.org) will be extended to >1 million peptides, and all data will be shared with the community via ProteomicsDB and ProteomeXchange.
Proteomic research greatly relies on the mass spectrometric and bioinformatic analysis of proteolytic digests of complex protein mixtures to infer protein identity and quantity. Albeit very powerful, there are technical and conceptual limitations in commonly followed approaches that make the measurement of complete proteomes very challenging. In part, this is due to the vast molecular complexity of proteomes that arises from e.g. gene expression, splicing of mRNAs or post-translational modification of proteins. As a result, the precise composition of a proteome is essentially always unknown. In addition, the measurement of protease digested proteomes by mass spectrometry creates large quantities of spectra of varying quality. The computational tools used in the field all make assumptions as to the presumed content of a proteome by matching mass spectra to peptides and to infer proteins. The statistical methods applied invariably represent compromises in terms of the sensitivity and specificity with which proteins are identified from complex mixtures. In analytical chemistry, verifying the identity of a molecule with certainty often makes use of synthetic reference standards. However, in proteome research the generation or use of such standards is only beginning to be implemented systematically. To facilitate this, we have embarked on a project termed ProteomeTools (Fig. 1) in which we aim to synthesize ~1.4 million individual peptides to cover all human proteins. Here, we report on the synthesis and multimodal LC-MS/MS analysis of >330,000 synthetic tryptic peptides covering essentially all canonical human proteins as annotated in Swissprot. Peptides were chosen either based on their experimentally determined proteotypicity or by brute force (all peptides within the typical mass range of a mass spectrometer) for hitherto unobserved proteins or those with little prior experimental evidence. We also included a subset of peptides of the Human SRMAtlas (Supplementary Table 1). As more data on the use of alternative proteases become available, such peptides (~300,000) will be systematically incorporated into the project to increase spectral and sequence coverage for any given protein. Another 200,000 peptides are earmarked for protein sequence variants such as protein isoforms or important natural or pathological variants. A substantial part (~350,000) of the capacity will be devoted to post-translationally modified peptides such as phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, ubiquitinylation and mono-glycosylation. While some of these peptides may be synthetically more challenging, their impact will likely be high as they represent the result of enzymatic activity that often modulates the function of proteins. Finally, we are reserving 200,000 peptides to represent other interesting biology such as disease associated mutations, HLA neo-antigens, protease cleavage products, small open reading frames or translated lincRNAs (Fig. 1a).
Tryptic peptides were individually synthesized, combined into pools of ~1,000 peptides and spiked with 66 non-naturally occurring and 15 stable isotope labeled peptides for retention time calibration. Whenever possible, we designed pools such that peptides do not have identical masses to avoid ambiguity in the mass spectrometric data or cover the entire LC gradient (Supplementary Figure 1). Each pool was subjected to an initial LC-MS/MS analysis using HCD and CID fragmentation on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in order to determine which peptides were successfully synthesized, to determine their chromatographic retention times (RT) and compute retention time indices (iRT; Supplementary Figure 2). For each peptide pool, an inclusion list was generated to target peptides for fragmentation in further LC-MS experiments using five different fragmentation methods (HCD, CID, ETD, ETHCD, ETCID) with ion trap or Orbitrap readout and HCD spectra were recorded at 6 different collision energies (Supplementary Figures 3-7). Peptides ranged from 7 to 40 amino acids in length and up to 96 % of these could be detected by LC-MS/MS in individual pools (78 % average recovery, Supplementary Figure 8-9). Using the open modification search option of MaxQuant/Andromeda, we were able to assess the side product profile to estimate the approximate yield of each peptide by measuring the percentage of the total MS signal that can be attributed to the target peptide sequence (Fig. 1b; Supplementary Figure 10). As expected, the purity of the synthesized peptides varied and many of the chemical by-products correspond to incompletely removed protection groups or missing amino acids. The presence of by-products turned out to be useful as truncated peptides provided additional evidence for the presence of the correct full length peptide. They may in the future also serve to refine retention time and fragmentation prediction or to identify some of the many good quality spectra that remain unidentified in typical proteomic experiments.
One important goal of the project is to generate reference mass spectra for the identification and quantification of human peptides and proteins. At an arbitrarily high Andromeda score cut-off of 100, indicating very high spectral quality, we obtained a total of 11.3 million peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) mapping to 211,895 peptides and covering each gene by a median of 9 peptides (Fig. 1c). The median precursor intensity fraction (PIF; i.e. the fraction of the precursor signal vs. the total signal selected for fragmentation) was 92%, indicating that the spectra of most peptides are largely free of other contaminating peptides. Very high quality tandem mass spectra were obtained for all eleven tandem MS methods used but with varying degrees of proteome coverage. Analysis of the Andromeda search engine score distribution (Fig. 1d) showed that the 211,895 peptides (peptide FDR <0.002%) led to the identification of 19,735 of the 20,036 human genes deposited in Swissprot thus providing very high quality reference spectra for 98.5% of the human proteome (Supplementary Table 2). The remaining genes/proteins often contain proline-rich repeats or retroviral sequences that cannot be covered by tryptic peptides of reasonable length. Some of these may eventually be covered when synthesizing peptides using other digestion enzyme specificities. As an interesting side note, because of considerable protein sequence conservation between the human and mouse proteomes, the peptide library also contains 60,961 (proteotypic) peptides covering 12,599 (77%) unique mouse genes, thus considerably expanding the scope and utility of these peptides (Supplementary Table 3; Supplementary Notes).
One obvious use of synthetic peptide reference spectra is to confirm identifications of rarely (or newly) observed proteins. At the time of writing, there were only two spectra in ProteomicsDB supporting the identification of the same peptide of Aquaporin 12B with identification Q-scores different from the target-decoy distributions using the 'picked' target-decoy approach (Fig. 2a). The mirror plot showing the ion trap spectrum of the endogenous peptide and the corresponding spectrum of the synthetic peptide indicates very good agreement thus validating the identification of this protein from a single peptide.
We recorded HCD spectra at six different normalized collision energies with the aim to identify conditions for the measurement of peptides by targeted assays such as SRM, PRM or SWATH. To evaluate if HCD spectra obtained in this study are suitable for this purpose, we compared our data to ~9,000 peptides from a SWATH spectral library built from proteome digests acquired on a QTOF instrument. The analysis shows that there is very high correlation between the two types of data (R>0.9) and that spectra with poor correlation may represent false positives in the SWATH spectral library (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Figure 11).
As an example to illustrate the usefulness of the data for developing software, we built a prototype classifier based on multiple HCD spectra for the same peptide at a particular collision energy. This classifier predicts the fragment ion intensity of tandem mass spectra of any peptide with Pearson correlation coefficients of around 0.9 (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Figures 12-14). Such tools may complement or eventually replace experimental data for the development of SRM/PRM/SWATH assays or facilitate the transfer of data recorded on a discovery proteomics instrument to an assay instrument. We consciously decided not to synthesize stable isotope encoded peptides for this project because their fragmentation spectra can be easily simulated based on spectra of the unlabeled version. It is also economically more efficient to create heavy peptides tailored to the project at hand. However, we are in the process of measuring peptides following chemical derivatization by tandem mass tags (TMT) and di-methyl labeling to cover the most commonly used stable isotope labeling methods.
An important aspect of the project is to enable and engage the proteomics community and this will be done in a number of ways. We encourage the community to propose sets of peptides to include in the project. Our stocks contain 100 clones of the peptide library which can be handed out to research groups willing to generate data on alternative mass spectrometric platforms such as QTOF instruments, ion mobility devices or different chromatographic systems. All of the current data is available in proteomeXchange and ProteomicsDB and we will do the same for all upcoming data to engage the bioinformatics community to enable re-use and re-analysis of what we believe is a valuable resource.
The tryptic peptides reported here are only the beginning of the project and many further uses of the information generated can be envisaged. We plan to release new data every six months (~250,000 peptides per release) so that the community can access this data while the project progresses. As the physical reagents are finite resources, the long term value of the work lies in the data. It should be valuable for the development of software tools that may include intelligent data acquisition routines within the instrument control software or the development of more powerful database or spectral library search engines utilizing e.g. concepts of machine learning. There is also still a need to develop improved statistical tools for the assessment of large-scale proteomic experiments particularly for data independent measurements such as SWATH or SRM/PRM. The spectral libraries generated in this project should provide ample opportunity to facilitate these applications. Reagents and software aside, we also plan to build targeted assays in the next two years for sets of functionally important proteins such as kinases and phosphopeptides representing the activation status of signaling pathways. The results obtained so far demonstrate that the overall project is conceptually and technically feasible and yield scientifically meaningful and interesting results. We are therefore confident that the molecular and digital tools arising from the ProteomeTools project will become a valuable resources for the proteomics community in the future.
Data availability
Reference spectra are available at https://www.proteomicsdb.org and updates to the resource are available at www.proteometools.org. The mass spectrometric data have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD004732.
Online Methods
Synthetic peptide sets
To achieve extensive coverage of human proteins, three different sets of peptides were created or used in this study. First, a "proteotypic" peptide set covering confidently and frequently identified proteins was derived from prior mass-spectrometric evidence available in ProteomicsDB. We selected between 2 and 10 unique (at gene level) tryptic peptides for each human gene to reach a cumulative proteotypicity of ~95 % (i.e. we stopped selecting further peptides when the selected peptides covered at least 95% of all cases a particular protein was identified). Further constraints included a peptide length of 7 to 40 amino acids and no more than two missed tryptic cleavage sites. The resulting list contained 124,875 peptides covering 15,855 human Uniprot/SwissProt annotated genes. Second, a "missing proteome" set was constructed containing tryptic peptides mapping to genes which lacked confident experimental identification evidence in ProteomicsDB. Here, any gene-unique tryptic peptide between 7 to 30 amino acids in length and allowing for a maximum of one missed cleavage site was included in the selection without restricting the number of peptides per gene. The resulting list contained 140,458 peptides covering 4,818 genes. Third, we obtained a subset of the "SRMAtlas" peptides comprising 90,967 peptides mapping to 19,099 genes also covering proteins with empirical evidence and "missing" proteins. Altogether, the three sets of tryptic peptides contained 330,286 non-redundant peptides covering 19,840 human genes as annotated in Uniprot/SwissProt (Version 2016-07-20; 42,164 protein sequences) (see Supplementary Table 1).
Peptide pool design
Peptide pools for synthesis and LC-MS measurement consisted of approximately 1,000 peptides each. The peptide pools representing the "proteotypic" and "missing proteome" sets were designed to have a narrow peptide length distribution to support optimal synthesis. Near isobaric peptides (+/- 10 ppm) were distributed across different pools of similar length to avoid ambiguous masses in pools wherever possible (Supplementary Table 1). To this end, peptides were first ordered by length and mass. Second, the peptides were sorted by taking every nth peptide within the ordered list of peptides of one length, where n is the number of pools needed to distribute these peptides. The resulting ordering provided a well sampled sub-population of peptides with the same MW distribution. In a third step, peptides with near isobaric (+/- 10 ppm) mass were identified and, as long as no additional near isobaric conflict was created, distributed across pools with similar peptide length (max 2 AAs difference).
The "SRMAtlas" peptide set was acquired in 96 well plates with each well containing one individual proteotypic peptide of 7-30 amino acids in length (i. e. one peptide per well, PEPotec Grade 1, suspended in 0.1% TFA in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/water). These were also pooled into sets of approximately 1,000 peptides. To create plate pools, the peptides from every plate were first manually pooled together resulting in mixtures of 95 peptides (one quality control peptide present in each plate was discarded to avoid accumulation of this peptide in the subsequent pooling process). To create measurement pools of ~1,000 peptides, either 10 (for fully-tryptic peptides; i.e. C-terminal K/R) or 14 (non- and semi-tryptic peptides; i.e. non-K/R C-terminal) plate pools were combined. In order to avoid bias in pools of 1000 peptides regarding mass (MW) or hydrophobicity index (HI), the pooling scheme was computed to best mimic the overall MW and HI distribution of the entire set. We used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test) to quantify the distance of the MW and HI distribution between mixtures of plate pools to the total distribution of the total set. Starting with a plate pool or mixture of plate pools, all other (still available) plate pools were tested to generate a combined mixture that is closest to the overall set. The best match (lowest p-value) was chosen and the process was repeated until the desired number of plate pools for combination was reached (Supplementary Figure 1). The resulting 96 measurement pools were desalted on C18 material (Waters, SepPak) before storage at -20 degreesC. All peptide sequences and their pool membership are listed in Supplementary Table 1.
Peptide synthesis
All peptides were individually synthesized following the Fmoc-based solid phase synthesis strategy. A carboxyamidomethylated cysteine building block was used to eliminate the need for cysteine modification prior to MS analysis. Peptides of the "proteotypic" and "missing gene" sets were synthesized by SPOT-synthesis on cellulose membranes at a scale of approximately 2-5 nmol of peptide per spot as described. Depending on the length of peptides in a given pool, up to 6 peptide pools (containing at most 6,000 peptides; see Supplementary Notes) were synthesized in parallel using a purpose built peptide synthesizer. Five quality control peptides were synthesized along with every peptide pool. Peptides were cleaved from the membrane into pools of 1,000 peptides following the design criteria described above. Following solvent evaporation, peptides were stored at -20 degreesC until use. Peptides from the "SRMAtlas" set were synthesized in 96 well synthesizers (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, PEPotec Grade 1) at a scale of 0.1 mg per peptide. They were pooled and stored as described above.
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry
Dried peptide pools were initially solubilized in 100% DMSO to a concentration of 10 pmol/mul by vortexing for 30 min at room temperature. The pools were then diluted to 10% DMSO using 1% formic acid in HPLC grade water to a stock solution concentration of 1 pmol/mul and stored at -20 degreesC until use. 10 mul of the stock solution were transferred to a 96-well plate and spiked with two retention time (RT) standards. The first set of retention time peptides (JPT Peptide Technologies) consisted of 66 peptides with non-naturally occurring peptide sequences (Supplementary Table 1). 200 fmol per peptide was used per injection. The second RT standard (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) comprised 15 13C-labelled peptides and 100 fmol per peptide was used per injection. Samples in the resulting 96-well plates were vacuum dried and stored at -20 degreesC until use.
Nanoscale liquid chromatography
For LC-MS analysis, the peptide pools in the 96 well plates were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water to a concentration of 100 fmol/mul per peptide (residual DMSO concentration of ~1%). An estimated amount of 200 fmol of every peptide in a pool was subjected to liquid chromatography using a Dionex 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using in-house packed C18 columns. The setup consisted of a 75 mum x 2 cm trap column packed with 5 mum particles of Reprosil Pur ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and a 75 mum x 40 cm analytical column, packed with 3 mum particles of C18 Reprosil Gold 120 (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column using 0.1% FA in water. Separation of the peptides was performed by using a linear gradient from 4% to 35% ACN with 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in water over 50 min followed by a washing step (60 min total method length) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 50 degreesC.
Mass spectrometry
The HPLC system was coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each peptide pool was first measured using a "survey method" consisting of an Orbitrap full MS scan (60k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360-1300 m/z, profile mode), followed by MS2 events with a duty cycle of 2 s for the most intense precursors and a dynamic exclusion set to 5 s as follows: (i) HCD scan with 28% normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout (15k resolution, 1e5 AGC-target, 22 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode); (ii) CID scan with 35% normalized collision energy and ion trap readout (rapid mode, 3e4 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q, 22 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode). From this data, inclusion lists with retention time constraints were generated for each pool and used for three subsequent LC-MS measurements focusing on different acquisition types. Precursors detected in the "survey method" were scheduled for fragmentation within a 5 min RT window. Peptides lacking identification in the survey run were added to the inclusion as 2+ or 3+ precursor ions, but without retention time scheduling. (1) The "HCD" method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360-1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with consecutive HCD scans at 20, 25 and 30 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout (15k resolution, 1e5 AGC-target, 20 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode). (2) The "IT" method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360-1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with (i) CID scan with 35 normalized collision energy and ion trap readout (rapid mode, 3e4 AGC target, 0.25 activation Q, 20 ms maximum injection time, inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled, 1.3 m/z isolation width, centroid mode); (ii) HCD scan with 28 normalized collision energy and ion trap, (iii) HCD scan with 20 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout; (iv) HCD scan with 23 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout. (3) The "ETD" method consisted of an Orbitrap MS1 scan (120k resolution, 5e5 AGC-target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 360-1300 m/z, profile mode) followed by 3 seconds of MS2 scans with (i) ETD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and Orbitrap readout; (ii) EThcD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and supplemental HCD activation with 28% normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout; (iii) ETciD scan using charge dependent ETD parameters and supplemental CID activation with 35 normalized collision energy and Orbitrap readout with settings described above.
Data processing
The logistics of data processing and MS method generation was governed by an in-house database (Supplementary Figure 8). RAW data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 searching individual LC-MS runs against pool-specific databases (see Supplementary Table 2). If not mentioned otherwise, default parameters were used: Carbamidomethylated cysteine was specified as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification. First search tolerance was set to 20 ppm, main search tolerance to 4.5 ppm and filtered for peptide and protein FDR of 1 %. Retention time windows of +/-5 min were corrected for drifts using the internal retention time standards. The pool-specific inclusion lists were generated from confidently identified precursors (from the survey method) which passed an ad-hoc Andromeda score cut-off of 100. For analysis of synthesis side product, the survey MS run was searched with unspecific digestion and "dependent peptides" enabled.
Conserved peptide sequences in human and mouse
A current mouse protein sequence database representing 16,336 mouse genes was obtained from Swissprot (version dated 07/09/2016, 16,818 sequences). The database was in silico digested using tryptic cleavage specificity (no proline rule) and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The resulting peptide list was filtered for unique entries and mapped against our sequence list of peptides (see Supplementary Notes and Supplementary Table 3).
Comparison QTOF vs Fusion Lumos spectra
We systematically compared spectra generated in this project on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) to a spectral library generated on a 5600 TripleTOF (QTOF) mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). For this, intensities of matching annotated fragment ions of the highest scoring (>100) beam-type CID spectrum per acquired normalized collision energy (Lumos) were correlated using Pearson correlation to the corresponding beam-type CID QTOF spectrum (acquired with rolling collision energy).
Fragmentation Prediction
First, MaxQuant result files were parsed and only spectra of unmodified doubly charged peptides with a PIF > 0.8 and a score of higher than 100 were selected for training. For each combination of amino acids N-terminal (left) and C-terminal (right) of the fragmentation position at a given normalized collision energy, a local polynomial regression (LOESS) model was fitted using the peptide length normalized fragmentation position and the base peak intensity (BPI) normalized intensity of the y-ions (see Supplementary Figure 11-13). The resulting models were tested on pool 66 of the "proteotypic" set using the same peptide selection criteria. Each possible y-ion for each peptide passing the filters was predicted using the corresponding LOESS-fit. The predicted y-ion intensities were scored against the measured spectra using the Pearson correlation coefficient.
Supplementary Material
Author Contributions
RA, HW, TM, AH, UR and BK conceived the study. DPZ, MWi, KS, JZ, TK, BD, KK, UK, RLM, BK designed experiments. DPZ, MWi, KS, JZ, TK, BD, DB, PY, KK, EWD, TS performed the experiments and analyzed data. MWi, SG, HCE, MWe, JS, TS, SA extended the web resource. DPZ, MWi and BK wrote the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests Statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Abbreviations
AGC
Automatic gain control
CE
Collision energy
CID
Collision induced dissociation
DIA
Data independent acquisition
DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
ESI
Electrospray ionization
ETciD
Electron-transfer/collision induced dissociation
ETD
Electron transfer dissociation
EThcD
Electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation
FA
Formic acid
HCD
Higher energy CID
HLA
Human leucocyte antigen
IT
IonTrap
iTRAQ
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification
LC-MS/MS
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
MS
Mass spectrometry
NCE
Normalized collision energy
nESI
Nano-ESI
ORF
Open reading frame
OT
Orbitrap
PIF
Precursor intensity fraction
QTOF
Quadrupole time-of-flight
RT
Retention time
SRM/PRM
Selected reaction monitoring/parallel reaction monitoring
SWATH
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra
TMT
Tandem mass tags
